
Print

The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
( ACT NO. V OF 1908 )
[ 21st March, 1908 ]
♣An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the Procedure of the Courts of Civil Judicature.


 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the procedure of the Courts of Civil Judicature; It is hereby enacted as follows:-

 
 
 
PRELIMINARY

Short title, commencement and extent.1.(1) This Act may be cited as the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
 
 
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of January, 1909.
 
 
(3) It extends to the whole of Bangladesh.
Definitions2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,-
 
 
(1) "Code" includes rules:
 
 
(2) "decree" means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the Court expressing it, conclusively determines the rights of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or final. It shall be deemed to include the rejection of a plaint and the determination of any question within 1[* * *] section 144, but shall not include-
 
 
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an order, or
 
 
(b) any order of dismissal for default.
 
 
Explanation.-A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before the suit can be completely disposed of. It is final when such adjudication completely disposes of the suit. It may be partly preliminary and partly final:
 
 
(3) "decree-holder" means any person in whose favour a decree has been passed or an order capable of execution has been made:
 
 
(4) "district" means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction (hereinafter called a "District Court"), and includes the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court Division:
 
 
(5) "foreign Court" means a Court situate beyond the limits of Bangladesh which has no authority in Bangladesh and is not established or continued by the Government:
 
 
(6) "foreign judgment" means the judgment of a foreign Court:
 
 
(7) "Government Pleader" includes any officer appointed by the Government to perform all or any of the functions expressly imposed by this Code on the Government Pleader and also any pleader acting under the directions of the Government Pleader:
 
 
(8) "Judge" means the presiding officer of a Civil Court:
 
 
(9) "Judgment" means the statement given by the Judge of the grounds of a decree or order:
 
 
(10) "Judgment-debtor" means any person against whom a decree has been passed or an order capable of execution has been made:
 
 
(11) "legal representative" means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is sued in a representative character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so suing or sued:
 
 
(12) "mesne profits" of property means those profits which the person in wrongful possession of such property actually received or might with ordinary diligence have received therefrom, together with interest on such profits but shall not include profits due to improvements made by the person in wrongful possession:
 
 
(13) "movable property" includes growing crops:
 
 
(14) "order" means the formal expression of any decision of a Civil Court which is not a decree:
 
 
(15) "pleader" means any person entitled to appear and plead for another in Court 2[* * *]:
 
 
(16) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules:
 
 
(17) "public officer" means a person falling under any of the following descriptions, namely:-
 
 
(a) every Judge;
 
 
(b) every member of the Civil Service of 3[The Republic];
 
 
(c) every commissioned or gazetted officer in the military, naval or air forces of Bangladesh while in the service of the 4[Republic];
 
 
(d) every officer of a Court of Justice whose duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or fact, or to make, authenticate or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order, in the Court, and every person especially authorised by a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties;
 
 
(e) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep any person in confinement;
 
 
(f) every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or convenience;
 
 
(g) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of the Government, or to execute any revenue-process, or to investigate, or to report on, any matter affecting the pecuniary interest of the Government, or to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the infraction of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of the Government; and
 
 
(h) every officer in the service or pay of the 5[Republic], or remunerated by fees or commission for the performance of any public duty:
 
 
(18) "rules" means rules and forms contained in the First Schedule or made under section 122 or section 125:
 
 
(19) "share in a corporation" shall be deemed to include stock, debenture stock, debentures or bonds: and
 
 
(20) "signed", save in the case of a judgment or decree, includes stamped.
Subordination of Courts.3. For the purposes of this Code, the District Court is subordinate to the High Court Division, and every Civil Court of a grade inferior to that of a District Court and every Court of Small Causes is subordinate to the High Court Division and District Court.
Savings4.(1) In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any special 6[* * *] law now in force or any special jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by or under any other law for the time being in force.
 
 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the proposition contained in sub-section (1), nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any remedy which a land-holder or landlord may have under any law for the time being in force for the recovery of rent of agricultural land from the produce of such land.
Application of the Code of Revenue Courts.5.(1) Where any Revenue Courts are governed by the provisions of this Code in those matters of procedure upon which any special enactment applicable to them is silent, the Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare that any portions of those provisions which are not expressly made applicable by this Code shall not apply to those Courts, or shall only apply to them with such notifications as the Government may prescribe.
 
 
(2) "Revenue Court" in sub-section (1) means a Court having jurisdiction under any 7[* * *] law to entertain suits or other proceedings relating to the rent, revenue or profits of land used for agricultural purposes, but does not include a Civil Court having original jurisdiction under this Code to try such suits or proceedings as being suits or proceedings of a civil nature.
Pecuniary Jurisdiction.6. Save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided, nothing herein contained shall operate to give any Court jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subject-matter of which exceeds the pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary jurisdiction.
Small Cause Courts.7. The following provisions shall not extend to Courts constituted under the 8[* * *] Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under the said Act, that is to say,-
 
 
(a) so much of the body of the Code as relates to-
 
 
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes;
 
 
(ii) the execution of decrees in such suits;
 
 
(iii) the execution of decrees against immovable property; and
 
 
(b) the following sections, that is to say,-
 
 
section 9,
 
 
sections 91 and 92,
 
 
sections 94 and 95 so far as they authorise or relate to-
 
 
(i) orders for the attachment of immovable
 
 
property,
 
 
(ii) injunctions,
 
 
(iii) the appointment of a receiver of immovable property, or
 
 
(iv) the interlocutory orders referred to in clause (e) of section 94; and
 
 
sections 96 to 112 and 115.
[Omitted]8. [Omitted by the Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinance Order, 1949].
Part I

SUITS IN GENERAL

Jurisdiction of the Courts and Res Judicata

Courts to try all civil suits unless barred.9. The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein contained) have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred.
 
 
Explanation.-A suit in which the right to property or to an office is contested is a suit of a civil nature, notwithstanding that such right may depend entirely on the decision of questions as to religious rites or ceremonies.
Stay of suit.10. No Court shall proceed with the trial of any suit in which the matter in issue is also directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between the same parties, or between parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating under the same title where such suit is pending in the same or any other Court in Bangladesh having jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in any Court beyond the limits of Bangladesh established or continued by the Government and having like jurisdiction, or before the Supreme Court.
 
 
Explanation.-The pendency of a suit in a foreign Court does not preclude the Court in Bangladesh from trying a suit founded on the same cause of action.
Res Judicata11. No Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially in issue has been directly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties, or between parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, in a court competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally decided by such Court.
 
 
Explanation I.-The expression "former suit" shall denote a suit which has been decided prior to the suit in question whether or not it was instituted prior thereto.
 
 
Explanation II.-For the purposes of this section, the competence of a Court shall be determined irrespective of any provisions as to a right of appeal from the decision of such Court.
 
 
Explanation III.-The matter above referred to must in the former suit have been alleged by one party and either denied or admitted, expressly or impliedly, by the other.
 
 
Explanation IV.-Any matter which might and ought to have been made ground of defence or attack in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantially in issue in such suit.
 
 
Explanation V.-Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly granted by the decree, shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to have been refused.
 
 
Explanation VI.-Where persons litigate bona fide in respect of a public right or of a private right claimed in common for themselves and others, all persons interested in such right shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to claim under the persons so litigating.
Bar to further suit.12. Where a plantiff is precluded by rules from instituting a further suit in respect of any particular cause of action, he shall not be entitled to institute a suit in respect of such cause of action in any Court to which this Code applies.
When foreign judgment not conclusive.13. A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any matter thereby directly adjudicated upon between the same parties or between parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating under the same title except-
 
 
(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction;
 
 
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;
 
 
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an incorrect view of international law or a refusal to recognise the law of Bangladesh in cases in which such law is applicable;
 
 
(d) where the proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural justice;
 
 
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud;
 
 
(f) where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in Bangladesh.
Presumption as to foreign judgments.14. The Court shall presume, upon the production of any document purporting to be a certified copy of a foreign judgment, that such judgment was pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction, unless the contrary appears on the record; but such presumption may be displaced by proving want of jurisdiction.
Place of Suing

Court in which suits to be instituted.15. Every suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest grade competent to try it.
Suits to be instituted where subject-matter situate.16. Subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law, suits-
 
 
(a) for the recovery of immovable property with or without rent or profits,
 
 
(b) for the partition of immovable property,
 
 
(c) for foreclosure, sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of or charge upon immovable property,
 
 
(d) for the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property,
 
 
(e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property,
 
 
(f) for the recovery of movable property actually under distraint or attachment,
 
 
shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate, or, in the case of suits referred to in clause (c), at the place where the cause of action has wholly or partly arisen:
 
 
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property held by or on behalf of the defendant may, where the relief sought can be entirely obtained through his personal obedience, be instituted either in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate, or, in the case of suits referred to in clause (c), at the place where the cause of action has wholly or partly arisen, or in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain.
 
 
Explanation.-In this section "property' means property situate in Bangladesh.
Suits for immovable property situate within jurisdiction of different Courts.17. Where a suit is to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property situate within the jurisdiction of different Courts, the suit may be instituted in any Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any portion of the property is situate:
 
 
Provided that, in respect of the value of the subject-matter of the suit, the entire claim is cognizable by such Court
Place of institution of suit where local limits of jurisdiction of Courts are uncertain.18.(1) Where it is alleged to be uncertain within the local limits of the jurisdiction of which of two or more Courts any immovable property is situate, any one of those Courts may, if satisfied that there is ground for the alleged uncertainly, record a statement to that effect and thereupon proceed to entertain and dispose of any suit relating to that property, and its decree in the suit shall have the same effect as if the property were situate within the local limits of its jurisdiction:
 
 
Provided that the suit is one with respect to which the Court is competent as regards the nature and value of the suit to exercise jurisdiction.
 
 
(2) Where a statement has not been recorded under sub-section (1), and an objection is taken before an appellate or revisional Court that a decree or order in a suit relating to such property was made by a Court not having jurisdiction where the property is situate, the appellate or revisional Court shall not allow the objection unless in its opinion there was, at the time of the institution of the suit, no reasonable ground for uncertainly as to the Court having jurisdiction with respect thereto and there has been a consequent failure of justice.
Suits for compensation for wrongs to person or movables.19. Where a suit is for compensation for wrong done to the person or to movable property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the jurisdiction of one Court and the defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of another Court, the suit may be instituted at the option of the plantiff in either of the said Courts.
 
 
Illustrations
 
 
(a) A, residing in 9[Chittagong] beats B in Dhaka.
 
 
B may sue A either in Dhaka or in 10[Chittagong].
 
 
(b) A, residing in 11[Chittagong] publishes in Dhaka statements defamatory of B. B may sue A either in Dhaka, or in 12[Chittagong].
Others suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of action arises.20. Subject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction.
 
 
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at the time of the commencement of the suit, actually or voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain; or
 
 
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the commencement of the suit, actually or voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided that in such case either the leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on business, or personally work for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or
 
 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
 
 
Explanation I.-Where a person has a permanent dwelling at one place and also a temporary residence at another place, he shall be deemed to reside at both places in respect of any cause of action arising at the place where he has such temporary residence.
 
 
Explanation II.-A Corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office in Bangladesh or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate office, at such place.
 
 
Illustrations
 
 
(a) A is a tradesman in Dhaka. B carries on business in 13[Chittagong]. B, by his agent in Dhaka, buys goods of A and requests A to deliver them to the 14[Bangladesh Biman]. A delivers the goods accordingly in Dhaka. A may sue B for the price of the goods either in Dhaka, where the cause of action has arisen, or in 15[Chittagong], where B carries on business.
 
 
(b) A resides at 16[Cox's Bazar], B at Dhaka and C at 17[Chittagong]. A, B and C being together at 18[Khulna], B and C make a joint promissiory note payable on demand, and deliver it to A. A may sue B and C 19[at Khulna], where the cause of action arose. He may also sue them at Dhaka, where B resides, or at 20[Chittagong], where C resides; but in each of these cases, if the non-resident defendant objects, the suit cannot proceed without the leave of the Court.
Objections to jurisdiction.21. No objection as to the place of suing shall be allowed by any appellate or revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement, and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice.
Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one Court.22. Where a suit may be instituted in any one of two or 22. Where a suit may be instituted in any one of two or more Courts and is instituted in one of such Courts, any defendant, after notice to the other parties, may, at the earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement, apply to have the suit transferred to another Court, and the Court to which such application is made, after considering the objections of the other parties (if any), shall determine in which of the several Courts having jurisdiction the suit shall proceed.
To what Court application lies.23.(1) Where the several Courts having jurisdiction are subordinate to the same Appellate Court, an application under section 22 shall be made to the Appellate Court.
 
 
(2) Where such Courts are subordinate to different Appellate Courts 21[* * *], the application shall be made to the 22[* * *] High Court Division.
 
 
(3) [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
General power of transfer and withdrawal.24.(1) On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, or of its own motion without such notice, the High Court Division or the District Court may at any stage-
 
 
(a) transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the same, or
 
 
(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in any Court subordinate to it, and
 
 
(i) try or dispose of the same; or
 
 
(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the same; or
 
 
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the Court from which it was withdrawn.
 
 
(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn under sub-section (1), the Court which thereafter tries such suit may, subject to any special directions in the case of any order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the point at which it was transferred or withdrawn.
 
 
(3) For the purposes of this section, Courts of Additional and Assistant Judges shall be deemed to be subordinate to the District Court.
 
 
(4) The Court trying any suit transferred or withdrawn under this section from a Court of Small Causes shall, for the purposes of such suit, be deemed to be a Court of Small Causes.
Appearance of parties on transfer of suit, etc.23[24A.(1) Where any suit is transferred under section 22, or any suit, appeal or other proceeding is transferred or withdrawn under sub-section (1) of section 24 on the application of a party, the Court ordering the transfer or withdrawal shall fix a date for the appearance of the parties before itself, if the suit, appeal or other proceeding is to be tried or disposed of by itself, or before the Court to which the case is so transferred.
 
 
(2) Where any suit, appeal or other proceeding is transferred from one Court to another, otherwise than on the application of a party, the parties thereto shall appear before the Court from which the suit, appeal or other proceedings is to be transferred, on the day already fixed for their appearance before that Court, and such Court shall then communicate the order of transfer to such parties and direct them to appear before the Court to which the suit, appeal or other proceeding is to be transferred, either on the same day, or on such earliest day as may be reasonable having regard to the distance at which the other Court is located.]
[Omitted]25. [Omitted by the Schedule of the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (Ordinance No. XXI of 1960).]

Institution of Suits

Institution of suits.
26. 24[1] Every suit shall be instituted by the presentation of a plaint or in such other manner as may be prescribed

25[(2) In every plaint, facts shall be proved by affidavit.]

Summons and Discovery

Summons to defendants.27. Where a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the defendant to appear and answer the claim and may be served in manner prescribed.
[Omitted]28. [Omitted by the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973), section 3 and 2nd Schedule.]
Service of foreign summonses.29. Summonses and other processes issued by any Civil or Revenue Court situate outside Bangladesh may be sent to the Courts in Bangladesh and served as if they were summonses issued by such Courts:
 
 
Provided that the 26[Government] has by notification in the official Gazette declared the provisions of this section to apply to such Courts.
Power to order discovery and the like.30. Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court may, at any time, either of its own motion or on the application of any party,-
 
 
(a) make such orders as may be necessary or reasonable in all matters relating to the delivery and answering of interrogatories, the admission of documents and facts, and the discovery, inspection, production, impounding and return of documents or other material objects producible as evidence;
 
 
(b) issue summonses to persons whose attendance is required either to give evidence or to produce documents or such other objects as aforesaid;
 
 
(c) order any fact to be proved by affidavit.
Summons to witness.31. The provisions in sections 27, 28 and 29 shall apply to summonses to give evidence or to produce documents or other material objects.
Penalty for default.32. The Court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons has been issued under section 30 and for that purpose may-
 
 
(a) issue a warrant for his arrest;
 
 
(b) attach and sell his property;
 
 
(c) impose a fine upon him not exceeding five hundred Taka;
 
 
(d) order him to furnish security for his appearance and in default commit him to the civil prison.
Judgment and Decree.

Judgment and decree.33. The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment, and on such judgment a decree shall follow.
Interest

Interest34.(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the Court may, in the decree, order interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged, from the date of the suit to the date of the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to the institution of the suit, with further interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable on the aggregate sum so adjudged, from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as the Court thinks fit.
 
 
2) Where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further interest on such aggregate sum as aforesaid from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other earlier date, the Court shall be deemed to have refused such interest, and a separate suit therefor shall not lie.

Costs

Costs
35.(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of any law for the time being in force, the costs of and incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court, and the Court shall have full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit shall be no bar to the exercise of such powers.

 
 
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall state its reasons in writing.

 
 
(3) The Court may give interest on costs at any rate not exceeding six per cent. per annum, and such interest shall be added to the costs and shall be recoverable as such.

Compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences.
27[35A.(1) If in any suit or other proceeding, including an execution proceeding, not being an appeal, any party objects to the claim or defence on the ground that the claim or defence, or any part of it, is false or vexatious, and if, thereafter, such claim or defence is disallowed, in whole or in part, the Court shall, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for the payment to the objector, such cost by way of compensation which may, without exceeding the limit of the Court's pecuniary jurisdiction, extend upto 28[fifty] thousand taka.

 
 
(2) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason thereof, be exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence made by him.

 
 
(3) The amount of any cost awarded under this section in respect of a false or vexatious claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages or compensation in respect of such claim or defence.]

Cost for delay in making applications, etc., in respect of interlocutory matters.
29[35B.(1) If at any stage of a suit or proceeding, an application or written objection is not filed within the time fixed by the Court, such application or written objection, as the case may be, shall not be admitted for hearing without payment by that party of such cost to the other party not exceeding two thousand taka.

 
 
(2) If after filing of written statement, any party to the suit makes an application in respect of any matter which, in the opinion of the Court, could and ought to have been made earlier, and is likely to delay the main proceeding of the suit, the Court may admit, but shall not hear and dispose of the application, without payment by that party of such cost to the other party not exceeding three thousand taka, as it shall determine and direct, and upon failure to pay the cost, the application shall stand rejected.]

Part II

EXECUTION

General

Application to orders.36. The provisions of this Code relating to the execution of decrees shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to the execution of orders.
Definition of Court which passed a decree.37. The expression "Court which passed a decree," or words to that effect, shall, in relation to the execution of decrees, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, be deemed to include,-
 
 
(a) where the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, the Court of first instance, and
 
 
(b) where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have jurisdiction to execute it, the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree was passed was instituted at the time of making the application for the execution of the decree, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.
Courts by which decrees may be executed

Court by which decree may be executed.38. A decree may be executed either by the Court which passed it, or by the Court to which it is sent for execution.
Transfer of decree.39.(1) The Court which passed a decree may, on the application of the decree-holder, send it for execution to another Court,-
 
 
(a) if the person against whom the decree is passed actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or
 
 
(b) if such person has not property within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court which passed the decree sufficient to satisfy such decree and has property within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or
 
 
(c) if the decree directs the sale or delivery of immovable property situate outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court which passed it, or
 
 
(d) if the Court which passed the decree considers for any other reason, which it shall record in writing, that the decree should be executed by such other Court.
 
 
(2) The Court which passed a decree may of its own motion send it for execution to any subordinate Court of competent jurisdiction.
[Omitted]40. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
Result of execution proceedings to be certified.41. The Court to which a decree is sent for execution shall certify to the Court which passed it the fact of such execution, or where the former Court fails to execute the same the circumstances attending such failure.
Powers of Court in executing transferred decree.42.(1) The Court executing a decree sent to it shall have the same powers in executing such decree as if it had been passed by itself. All persons disobeying or obstructing the execution of the decree shall be punishable by such Court in the same manner as if it had passed the decree. And its order in executing such decree shall be subject to the same rules in respect of appeal as if the decree had been passed by itself.
 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Court executing a decree sent to it shall have the following powers, namely:-
 
 
(a) power under section 39 to transfer the decree to another Court, if necessary;
 
 
(b) power under sub-section (1) of section 50 to permit execution to proceed against the legal representatives of a deceased judgment-debtor;
 
 
(c) power under section 152 to correct clerical or arithmetical errors;
 
 
(d) power under rule 16 of Order XXI to recognise the assignment of a decree;
 
 
(e) power under sub-rule (2) of rule 50 of Order XXI to grant leave to a decree-holder to proceed against a person not already recognised as a partner in a firm in an execution proceeding against the firm;
 
 
(f) power under clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule 53 of Order XXI to give notice of attachment of decree passed by another Court.
Execution of decrees passed by British Courts in places to which this Part does not extend or in foreign territory.43. Any decree passed by a Civil Court established in any area in Bangladesh to which the provisions relating to execution do not extend, 30[* * *] may, if it cannot be executed within the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, be executed in manner herein provided within the jurisdiction of any Court in Bangladesh.
[Omitted]44. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
Execution of decrees passed by Courts in the United Kingdom and other reciprocating territory.31[44A.(1) Where a certified copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of 32[* * *] any reciprocating territory has been filed in a District Court, the decree may be executed in Bangladesh as if it had been passed by the District Court.
 
 
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a certificate from such superior Court stating the extent, if any, to which the decree has been satisfied or adjusted and such certificate shall, for the purposes of proceedings under this section, be conclusive proof of the extent of such satisfaction or adjustment.
 
 
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified copy of the decree apply to the proceedings of a District Court executing a decree under this section, and the District Court shall refuse execution of any such decree, if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the decree falls within any of the exceptions specified in clauses (a) to (f) of section 13.]
 
 
33[* * *]
 
 
Explanation 2.- "Reciprocating territory" means 34[any] country or territory as the Government may, from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, declare to be reciprocating territory for the purposes of this section; and "Superior Courts", with reference to any such territory, means such Courts as may be specified in the said notification.
 
 
Explanation 3.- "Decree", with reference to a superior Court, means any decree or judgment of such Court under which a sum of money is payable, not being a sum payable in respect of taxes or other charges of a like nature or in respect of a fine or other penalty, and
 
 
35[* * *]
 
 
(b) in no case includes an arbitration award, even if such award is enforceable as a decree or judgment.]
[Omitted]45. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
Precepts46.(1) Upon the application of the decree-holder the Court which passed the decree may, whenever it thinks fit, issue a precept to any other Court which would be competent to execute such decree to attach any property belonging to the judgment-debtor and specified in the precept.
 
 
(2) The Court to which a precept is sent shall proceed to attach the property in the manner prescribed in regard to the attachment of property in execution of a decree:
 
 
Provided that no attachment under a precept shall continue for more than two months unless the period of attachment is extended by an order of the Court which passed the decree or unless before the determination of such attachment the decree has been transferred to the Court by which the attachment has been made and the decree-holder has applied for an order for the sale of such property.
[Omitted]47. [Omitted by section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).]
Limit of Time for Execution

Execution barred in certain cases.48.(1) Where an application to execute a decree not being a decree granting an injunction has been made, no order for the execution of the same decree shall be made upon any fresh application presented after the expiration of twelve years from
 
 
(a) the date of the decree sought to be executed, or,
 
 
(b) where the decree or any subsequent order directs any payment of money or the delivery of any property to be made at a certain date or at recurring periods, the date of the default in making the payment or delivery in respect of which the applicant seeks to execute the decree.
 
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed
 
 
(a) to preclude the Court from ordering the execution of a decree upon an application presented after the expiration of the said term of twelve years, where the judgment-debtor has, by fraud or force, prevented the execution of the decree at some time within twelve years immediately before the date of the application; or
 
 
(b) to limit or otherwise affect the operation of article 183 of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908.
Transferees and Legal Representatives

Transferee49. Every transferee of a decree shall hold the same subject to the equities (if any) which the judgment-debtor might have enforced against the original decree-holder.
Legal representative50.(1) Where a judgment-debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied, the holder of the decree may apply to the Court which passed it to execute the same against the legal representative of the deceased.
 
 
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representative, he shall be liable only to the extent of the property of the deceased which has come to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and, for the purpose of ascertaining such liability, the Court executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the application of the decree-holder, compel such legal representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit.

Procedure in Execution

Powers of Court to enforce execution.
51. Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court may, on the application of the decree-holder, order execution of the decree-

 
 
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed;

 
 
(b) by attachment and sale or by sale without attachment of any property;

 
 
(c) by arrest and detention in prison;

 
 
(d) by appointing a receiver; or

 
 
(e) in such other manner 36[as may be provided hereinafter in the Code or] as the nature of the relief granted may require:

 
 
Provided that, where the decree is for the payment of money, execution by detention in prison shall not be ordered unless, after giving the judgment-debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be committed to prison, the Court, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied-

 
 
(a) that the judgment-debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or delaying the execution of the decree,-

 
 
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or

 
 
(ii) has, after the institution of the suit in which the decree was passed, dishonestly transferred, concealed, or removed any part of his property, or committed any other act of bad faith in relation to his property; or

 
 
(b) that the judgment-debtor has, or has had since the date of the decree, the means to pay the amount of the decree or some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or neglected to pay the same, or

 
 
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment-debtor was bound in a fiduciary capacity to account.

 
 
Explanation.-In the calculation of the means of the judgment-debtor for the purposes of clause (b), there shall be left out of account any property which, by or under any law or custom having the force of law for the time being in force, is exempt from attachment in execution of the decree.

Enforcement of decree against legal representative.
52.(1) Where a decree is passed against a party as the legal representative of a deceased person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property of the deceased, it may be executed by the attachment and sale of any such property.

 
 
(2) Where no such property remains in the possession of the judgment-debtor and he fails to satisfy the Court that he has duly applied such property of the deceased as is proved to have come into his possession, the decree may be executed against the judgment-debtor to the extent of the property in respect of which he has failed so to satisfy the Court in the same manner as if the decree had been against him personally.

Liability of ancestral property.
53. For the purposes of section 50 and section 52, property in the hands of a son or other descendant which is liable under Hindu law for the payment of the debt of a deceased ancestor, in respect of which a decree has been passed, shall be deemed to be property of the deceased which has come to the hands of the son or other descendant as his legal representative.

Partition of estate or separation of share.
54. Where the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government, or for the separate possession of a share of such an estate, the partition of the estate or the separation of the share shall be made by the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to the partition, or the separate possession of shares, of such estates.


Arrest and Detention

Arrest and detention.
55.(1) A judgment-debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at any hour and on any day, and shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before the Court, and his detention may be in the civil prison of the district in which the Court ordering the detention is situate, or, where such civil prison does not afford suitable accommodation, in any other place which the Government may appoint for the detention of persons ordered by the Courts of such district to be detained:

 
 
Provided, firstly, that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwelling-house shall be entered after sunset and before sunrise:

 
 
Provided, secondly, that no outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such dwelling-house is in the occupancy of the judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but when the officer authorised to make the arrest has duly gained access to any dwelling-house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has reason to believe the judgment-debtor is to be found:

 
 
Provided, thirdly, that, if the room is in the actual occupancy of a woman who is not the judgement-debtor and who according to the customs of the country does not appear in public, the officer authorised to make the arrest shall give notice to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, and, after allowing a reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for withdrawing, may enter the room for the purpose of making the arrest:

 
 
Provided, fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a judgment-debtor is arrested, is a decree for the payment of money and the judgment-debtor pays the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the officer arresting him, such officer shall at once release him.

 
 
(2) The Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare that any person or class of persons whose arrest might be attended with danger or inconvenience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a decree otherwise than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the Government in this behalf.

 
 
(3) Where a judgment-debtor is arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money and brought before the Court, the Court shall inform him that he may apply to be declared an insolvent, and that he may be discharged if he has not committed any act of bad faith regarding the subject of the application and if he complies with the provisions of the law of insolvency for the time being in force.

 
 
(4) Where a judgment-debtor expresses his intention to apply to be declared an insolvent and furnishes security, to the satisfaction of the Court, that he will within one month so apply, and that he will appear, when called upon, in any proceeding upon the application or upon the decree in execution of which he was arrested, the Court may release him from arrest, and, if he fails so to apply and to appear, the Court may either direct the security to be realized or commit him to the civil prison in execution of the decree.

Prohibition of arrest or detention of women in execution of decree for money.
56. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, the Court shall not order the arrest or detention in the civil prison of 37[an old, infirm, pregnant or breast-feeding woman] in execution of a decree for the payment of money.

[Omitted]
38[***]

Detention and release.
58.(1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a decree shall be so detained,-

 
 
(a) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding fifty Taka, for a period of six months, and,

 
 
(b) in any other case for a period of six weeks:

 
 
Provided that he shall be released from such detention before the expiration of the said period of six months or six weeks, as the case may be,-

 
 
(i) on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention being paid to the officer in charge of the civil prison, or

 
 
(ii) on the decree against him being otherwise fully satisfied, or

 
 
(iii) on the request of the person on whose application he has been so detained 39[:]

 
 
40[***]

 
 
Provided, also, that he shall not be released from such detention under clause (ii) or clause (iii), without the order of the Court.

 
 
(2) A judgment-debtor released from detention under this section shall not merely by reason of his release be discharged from his debt, but he shall not be liable to be re-arrested under the decree in execution of which he was detained in the civil prison.

Release on ground of illness.
59.(1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a judgment-debtor has been issued the Court may cancel it on the ground of his serious illness.

 
 
(2) Where a judgment-debtor has been arrested, the Court may release him if, in its opinion, he is not in a fit state of health to be detained in the civil prison.

 
 
(3) Where a judgment-debtor has been committed to the civil prison, he may be released therefrom-

 
 
(a) by the Government, on the ground of the existence of any infectious or contagious disease, or

 
 
(b) by the committing Court, or any Court to which that Court is subordinate, on the ground of his suffering from any serious illness.

 
 
(4) A judgment-debtor released under this section may be re-arrested, but the period of his detention in the civil prison shall not in the aggregate exceed that prescribed by section 58.

Attachment

Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree.60.(1) The following property is liable to attachment and sale in execution of a decree, namely, lands, houses or other buildings, goods, money, bank-notes, cheques, bills of exchange, hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities for money, debts, shares in a corporation and, save as hereinafter mentioned, all other saleable property, moveable or immovable, belonging to the judgment-debtor, or over which, or the profits of which, he has a disposing power which he may exercise for his own benefit, whether the same be held in the name of the judgment-debtor or by another person in trust for him or on his behalf: Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, namely:-
 
 
(a) the necessary wearing-apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedding of the judgment-debtor, his wife and children, and such personal ornaments as, in accordance with religious usage, cannot be parted with by any woman;
 
 
(b) tools of artisans, and, where the judgment-debtor is an agriculturist, his implements of husbandry and such cattle and seed-grain as may, in the opinion of the Court, be necessary to enable him to earn his livelihood as such, and such portion of agricultural produce or of any class of agricultural produce as may have been declared to be free from liability under the provisions of the next following section;
 
 
(c) houses and other buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the land immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to an agriculturist and occupied by him;
 
 
(d) books of account;
 
 
(e) a mere right to sue for damages;
 
 
(f) any right of personal service;
 
 
(g) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of the Government, or payable out of any service family pension fund notified in the official Gazette by the Government or the Government in this behalf, and political pensions;
 
 
(h) the wages of labourers and domestic servants, whether payable in money or in kind;
 
 
(i) salary to the extent of the first hundred Taka and one-half the remainder:
 
 
Provided that where such salary is the salary of a Servant of the 41[Republic] or a servant of 42[the Railway] or local authority, and the whole or any part of the portion of such salary liable to attachment has been under attachment, whether continuously or intermittently for a total period of twenty-four months, such portion shall be exempt from attachment until the expiry of a further period of twelve months and, where such attachment has been made in execution of one and the same decree, shall be finally exempt from attachment in execution of that decree;
 
 
(j) the pay and allowances of persons to whom the 43[Army Act, 1952, Navy Ordinance, 1961, or the Air Force Act, 1953,] applies;
 
 
(k) all compulsory deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925, for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by the said Act not to be liable to attachment;
 
 
(l) any allowance forming part of the emoluments of any servant of the 44[Republic] or of any servant of 45[the Railway] or local authority which the Government may by notification in the official Gazette declare to be exempt from attachment, and any subsistence grant or allowance made to any such servant while under suspension;
 
 
(m) an expectancy of succession by survivorship or other merely contingent or possible right or interest;
 
 
(n) a right to future maintenance;
 
 
(o) any allowance declared by any Bangladesh law to be exempt from liability to attachment or sale in execution of a decree; and,
 
 
(p) where the judgment-debtor is a person liable for the payment of land-revenue, any movable property which, under any law for the time being applicable to him, is exempt from sale for the recovery of an arrear of such revenue.
 
 
Explanation 1.-The particulars mentioned in clauses (g), (h), (i), (j), (l) and (o) are exempt from attachment or sale whether before or after they are actually payable, and in the case of salary other than salary of a servant of the 46[Republic] or a servant of 47[the Railway] or local authority the attachable portion thereof is exempt from attachment until it is actually payable.
 
 
Explanation 2.-In clauses (h) and (i), "salary" means the total monthly emoluments, excluding any allowance declared exempt from attachment under the provisions of clause (l), derived by a person from his employment whether on duty or on leave.
 
 
48[* * *]
 
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt houses and other buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the lands immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) from attachment or sale in execution of decrees for rent of any such house, building, site or land.
Partial exemption of agricultural produce.61. The Government may, by general or special order published in the official Gazette, declare that such portion of agricultural produce, or of any class of agricultural produce, as may appear to the Government to be necessary for the purpose of providing until the next harvest for the due cultivation of the land and for the support of the judgment-debtor and his family, shall, in the case of all agriculturists or of any class of agriculturists, be exempted from liability to attachment or sale in execution of a decree.
Seizure of property in dwelling-house.62.(1) No person executing any process under this Code directing or authorising seizure of movable property shall enter any dwelling-house after sunset and before sunrise.
 
 
(2) No outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such dwelling-house is in the occupancy of the judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but when the person executing any such process has duly gained access to any dwelling-house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has reason to believe any such property to be.
 
 
(3) Where a room in a dwelling-house is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, according to the customs of the country, does not appear in public, the person executing the process shall give notice to such woman that she is at liberty to withdraw; and, after allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for withdrawing, he may enter such room for the purpose of seizing the property, using at the same time every precaution, consistent with these provisions, to prevent its clandestine removal.
Property attached in execution of decrees of several Courts.63.(1) Where property not in the custody of any Court is under attachment in execution of decrees of more Courts than one, the Court which shall receive or realize such property and shall determine any claim thereto and any objection to the attachment thereof shall be the Court of highest grade, or, where there is no difference in grade between such Courts, the Court under whose decree the property was first attached.
 
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any proceeding taken by a Court executing one of such decrees.
Private alienation of property after attachment to be void.64. Where an attachment has been made, any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the judgment-debtor of any debt, dividend or other monies contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims enforceable under the attachment.
 
 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, claims enforceable under an attachment include claims for the rateable distribution of assets.
Sale

Purchaser's title65. Where immovable property is sold in execution of a decree and such sale has become absolute, the property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time when the property is sold and not from the time when the sale becomes absolute.
Suit against purchaser not maintainable on ground of purchase being on behalf of plaintiff.66.(1) No suit shall be maintained against any person claiming title under a purchase certified by the Court in such manner as may be prescribed on the ground that the purchase was made on behalf of the plaintiff or on behalf of some one through whom the plaintiff claims.
 
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall bar a suit to obtain a declaration that the name of any purchaser certified as aforesaid was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or without the consent of the real purchaser, or interfere with the right of a third person to proceed against that property, though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser, on the ground that it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third person against the real owner.
Power for Government to make rules as to sales of land in execution of decrees for payment of money.67.(1) The Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for any local area imposing conditions in respect of the sale of any class of interests in land in execution of decrees for the payment of money, where such interests are so uncertain or undermined as, in the opinion of the Government, to make it impossible to fix their value.
 
 
(2) When on the date on which this Code came into operation in any local area, any special rules as to sale of land in execution of decrees were in force therein, the Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare such rules to be in force, or may, by a like notification, modify the same.
 
 
Every notification issued in the exercise of the powers conferred by this sub-section shall set out the rules so continued or modified.
Delegation to Collector of Power to Execute Decrees against Immovable Property

Power to prescribe rules for transferring to Collector execution of certain decrees.68. The Government may, declare, by notification in the official Gazette, that in any local area the execution of decrees in cases in which a Court has ordered any immovable property to be sold, or the execution of any particular kind of such decrees, or the execution of decrees ordering the sale of any particular kind of, or interest in, immovable property, shall be transferred to the Collector.
Provisions of Third Schedule to apply.69. The provisions set forth in the Third Schedule shall apply to all cases in which the execution of a decree has been transferred under the last preceding section.
Rules of procedure.70.(1) The Government may make rules consistent with the aforesaid provisions-
 
 
(a) for the transmission of the decree from the Court to the Collector, and for regulating the procedure of the Collector and his subordinates in executing the same, and for retransmitting the decree from the Collector to the Court;
 
 
(b) conferring upon the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector all or any of the powers which the Court might exercise in the execution of the decree if the execution thereof had not been transferred to the Collector;
 
 
(c) providing for orders made by the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector, or orders made on appeal with respect to such orders, being subject to appeal to, and revision by, superior revenue-authorities as nearly as may be as the orders made by the Court, or orders made on appeal with respect to such orders, would be subject to appeal to, and revision by, appellate or revisional Courts under this Code or other law for the time being in force if the decree had not been transferred to the Collector.
(2) A power conferred by rules made under sub-section (1) upon the collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector, or upon any appellate or revisional authority, shall not be exercisable by the Court or by any Court in exercise of any appellate or revisional jurisdiction which it has with respect to decrees or orders of the Court.
Collector deemed to be acting judicially.71. In executing a decree transferred to the Collector under section 68 the Collector and his subordinates shall be deemed to be acting judicially.
Where Court may authorise Collector to stay public sale of land.72.(1) Where in any local area in which no declaration under section 68 is in force the property attached consists of land or of a share in land, and the Collector represents to the Court that the public sale of the land or share is objectionable and that satisfaction of the decree may be made within a reasonable period by a temporary alienation of the land or share, the Court may authorise the Collector to provide for such satisfaction in the manner recommended by him instead of proceeding to a sale of the land or share.
 
 
(2) In every such case the provisions of sections 69 to 71 and of any rules made in pursuance thereof shall apply so far as they are applicable.
Distribution of Assets

Proceeds of execution-sale to be rateably distributed among decree-holders.73.(1) Where assets are held by a Court and more persons than one have, before the receipt of such assets, made application to the Court for the execution of decrees for the payment of money passed against the same judgment-debtor and have not obtained satisfaction thereof, the assets, after deducting the costs of realization, shall be rateably distributed among all such persons:
 
 
Provided as follows:-
 
 
(a) where any property is sold subject to a mortgage or charge, the mortgagee or incumbrancer shall not be entitled to share in any surplus arising from such sale;
 
 
(b) where any property liable to be sold in execution of a decree is subject to a mortgage or charge, the Court may, with the consent of the mortgagee or incumbrancer, order that the property be sold free from the mortgage or charge, giving to the mortgagee or incumbrancer the same interest in the proceeds of the sale as he had in the property sold;
 
 
(c) where any immovable property is sold in execution of a decree ordering its sale for the discharge of an incumbrance thereon, the proceeds of sale shall be applied-
 
 
firstly, in defraying the expenses of the sale;
 
 
secondly, in discharging the amount due under the decree;
 
 
thirdly, in discharging the interest and principal monies due on subsequent incumbrances (if any); and
 
 
fourthly, rateably among the holders of decrees for the payment of money against the judgment-debtor, who have, prior to the sale of the property, applied to the Court which passed the decree ordering such sale for execution of such decrees, and have not obtained satisfaction thereof.
 
 
(2) Where all or any of the assets liable to be rateably distributed under this section are paid to a person not entitled to receive the same, any person so entitled may sue such person to compel him to refund the assets.
 
 
(3) Nothing in this section affects any right of the Government.
Resistance to Execution

Resistance to execution.74. Where the Court is satisfied that the holder of a decree for the possession of immovable property or that the purchaser of immovable property sold in execution of a decree has been resisted or obstructed in obtaining possession of the property by the judgment-debtor or some person on his behalf and that such resistance or obstruction was without any just cause, the Court may, at the instance of the decree-holder or purchaser, order the judgment-debtor or such other person to be detained in the civil prison for a term which may extend to thirty days and may further direct that the decree-holder or purchaser be put into possession of the property.
Part III

INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS

Commissions

Power of Court to issue commissions.75. Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court may issue a commission-
 
 
(a) to examine any person;
 
 
(b) to make a local investigation;
 
 
(c) to examine or adjust accounts; or
 
 
(d) to make a partition.
[Omitted]76. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
Letter of request.77. In lieu of issuing a commission the Court may issue a letter of request to examine a witness residing at any place not within Bangladesh.
Commissions issued by foreign Courts.78. Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the provisions as to the execution and return of commissions for the examination of witnesses shall apply to commissions issued by or at the instance of-
 
 
(a) Courts situate beyond the limits of Bangladesh and established or continued by the authority of Government, or
 
 
49[* * *]
 
 
(c) Courts of any State or country outside Bangladesh.
Part IV

SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES

Suits by or against the Government or Public Officers in their official capacity

Suits by or against the Government.79. In a suit by or against the Government the authority to 79. In a suit by or against the Government the authority to be named as plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, 50[shall be Bangladesh]-
 
 
51[* * *]
Notice80.(1) A suit may be instituted against the Government or against a public officer, in respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity, after the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered to or left at the office of,-
 
 
52[* * *]
 
 
(b)(i) in the case of a suit against the Government other than a suit relating to the affairs of 53[the Railway], a Secretary to 54[the Government] or the Collector of the District; and
 
 
(ii) in the case of a suit against the Government relating to the affairs of 55[the Railway], the General Manager of the Railway 56[* * *],
 
 
and in the case of a public officer, delivered to him or left at his office stating the cause of action, the name, description of place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.
 
 
(2) Where any such suit is instituted without delivering or leaving such notice as aforesaid or before the expiration of the said period of two months or where the plaint does not contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to any costs if settlement as regards the subject-matter of the suit is reached or the Government or the public officer concedes the plaintiff's claim, within the period of two months from the date of the institution of the suit:
 
 
Provided that in a suit instituted without such notice, the Court shall allow not less than three months to the Government to submit its written statement.
Exemption from arrest and personal appearance.81. In a suit instituted against a public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by him in his official capacity-
 
 
(a) the defendant shall not be liable to arrest nor his property to attachment otherwise than in execution of a decree, and,
 
 
(b) where the Court is satisfied that the defendant cannot absent himself from his duty without detriment to the public service, it shall exempt him from appearing in person.
Execution of decree.82.(1) Where the decree is against the Government or against a public officer in respect of any such act as aforesaid, a time shall be specified in the decree within which it shall be satisfied; and, if the decree is not satisfied within the time so specified, the Court shall report the case for the orders of the Government.
 
 
(2) Execution shall not be issued on any such decree unless it remains unsatisfied for the period of three months computed from the date of such report.
Suits by Aliens and by or against foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys

When aliens may sue.83.(1) Alien enemies residing in Bangladesh with the permission of the Government, and alien friends, may sue in the Courts in 57[Bangladesh], as if they were citizens of 58[Bangladesh].
 
 
(2) No alien enemy residing in Bangladesh without such permission, or residing in a foreign country, shall sue in any of such Courts.
 
 
Explanation.-Every person residing in a foreign country the Government of which is at war with, or engaged in military operations against, Bangladesh, and carrying on business in that country without a license in that behalf under the hand of a Secretary to the Government shall, for the purpose of sub-section (2), be deemed to be an alien enemy residing in a foreign country.
When foreign States may sue.84.(1) A foreign State may sue in any Court in 59[Bangladesh]:
 
 
Provided that such State has been recognized by the Government:
 
 
Provided, also, that the object of the suit is to enforce a private right vested in the head of such State or in any officer of such State in his public capacity.
 
 
(2) Every Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that a foreign State has or has not been recognized by the Government.
Persons specially appointed by Government to prosecute or defend for Rules of foreign States.85.(1) Persons specially appointed by order of the Government at the request of the Ruler of any foreign State, or at the request of any person competent, in the opinion of the Government, to act on behalf of such Ruler, to prosecute or defend any suit on his behalf, shall be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom appearances, acts and applications under this Code may be made or done on behalf of such Ruler.
 
 
(2) An appointment under this section may be made for the purpose of a specified suit or of several specified suits, or for the purpose of all such suits as it may from time to time be necessary to prosecute or defend on behalf of the Ruler.
 
 
(3) A person appointed under this section may authorise or appoint persons to make appearances and applications and do acts in any such suit or suits as if he were himself a party thereto.
Suits against Rulers.60[86.(1) Any Ruler of foreign State may, with the consent of the Government, certified by the signature of a Secretary to that Government but not without such consent, be sued in any competent Court.
 
 
(2) Such consent may be given with respect to a specified suit or to several specified suits or with respect to all suits of any specified class or classes, and may specify, in the case of any suit or class of suits, the Court in which the Ruler may be sued; but it shall not be given unless it appears to the consenting authority that the Ruler
 
 
(a) has instituted a suit in the Court against the person desiring to sue him, or
 
 
(b) by himself or another trades within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or
 
 
(c) is in possession of immovable property situated within those limits and is to be sued with reference to such property or for money charged thereon.
 
 
(3) No such Ruler shall be arrested under this Code, and, except with the consent of the Government certified as aforesaid, on decree shall be executed against the property of any such Ruler.
 
 
(4) [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
 
 
(5) A person may, as a tenant of immovable property, sue, without such consent as is mentioned in this section, a Ruler from whom he holds or claims to hold the property.
Suits against diplomatic agents.
 
86A.(1) No proceeding in any Court shall lie against a diplomatic agent except in a case relating to-
 
(a) any private immovable property situated in Bangladesh held by him in his private capacity and not on behalf of the sending State for the purpose of the mission;
 
(b) a succession in which the diplomatic agent is involved as executor, administrator, heir or legatee as a private person and not on behalf of the sending State;
 
(c) any professional or commercial activity exercised by the diplomatic agent in Bangladesh outside his official functions.
 
(2) No measures of execution shall be taken in respect of a diplomatic agent except in cases which come under clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) and in which such measures can be taken without infringing the inviolability of his person or of his residence.
 
(3) The initiation of any proceedings in a Court by a diplomatic agent shall preclude him from invoking immunity from jurisdiction under this section in respect of any counter-claim directly connected with the principal claim.
 
(4) The immunity of a diplomatic agent under sub- (4) The immunity of a diplomatic agent under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may be waived by the sending State; and any such waiver shall be express.
 
(5) Waiver of immunity in respect of any proceedings shall not be held to imply waiver of immunity in respect of any measure of execution for which a separate waiver shall be necessary.
 
(6) In this section, 'diplomatic agent' in relation to a State means the head of the mission in Bangladesh of that State and includes a member of the staff of that mission having diplomatic rank.]
 
Style of Rulers as parties to suits.87. The Ruler of a foreign State may sue, and shall be sued, in the name of his State:
 
 
Provided that in giving the consent referred to in the foregoing section the Government, or the Government, as the case may be, may direct that any such Ruler shall be sued in the name of an agent or in any other name.
[Suits Against Rulers of Acceding and Merged States

[Omitted]87A. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]]
Interpleader

Where interpleader suit may be instituted.88. Where two or more persons claim adversely to one another the same debt, sum of money or other property, movable or immovable, from another person, who claims no interest therein other than for charges or costs and who is ready to pay or deliver it to the rightful claimant, such other person may institute a suit of interpleader against all the claimants for the purpose of obtaining a decision as to the person to whom the payment or delivery shall be made and of obtaining indemnity for himself:
 
 
Provided that where any suit is pending in which the rights of all parties can properly be decided, no such suit of interpleader shall be instituted.
Part V

SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS

[ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION]

[Omitted]89. [Omitted by section 49 and Third Schedule of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (Act No. X of 1940).]
Arbitration89B.(1) If the parties to a suit, at any stage of the proceeding, apply to the Court for withdrawal of the suit on ground that they will refer the dispute or disputes in the suit to arbitration for settlement, the Court shall allow the application and permit the suit to be withdrawn; and the dispute or disputes, thereafter, shall be settled in accordance with Salish Ain, 2001 (Act No. 1 of 2001) so far as may be applicable:
 
 
Provided that, if, for any reason, the arbitration proceeding referred to above does not take place or an arbitral award is not given, the parties shall be entitled to re-institute the suit permitted to be withdrawn under this sub-section.
 
 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be an arbitration agreement under section 9 of the Salish Ain, 2001 (Act No. 1 of 2001).]
Mediation61[89A.(1) Except in a suit under the 62[Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 (Act No. 8 of 2003)], after filing of written statement, if all the contesting parties are in attendance in the Court in person or by their respective pleaders, 63[the Court shall], by adjourning the hearing, mediate in order to settle the dispute or disputes in the suit, or refer the dispute or disputes in the suit 64[to the concerned Legal Aid Officer appointed under the Legal Aid Act, 2000 (Act No. 6 of 2000), or] to the engaged pleaders of the parties, or to the party or parties, where no pleader or pleaders have been engaged, or to a mediator from the panel as may be prepared by the District Judge under sub-section (10), for undertaking efforts for settlement through mediation. 65[***}
 
 
 
(2) When the reference under sub-section (1) is made through the pleaders, the pleaders shall, by their mutual agreement in consultation with their respective clients, appoint another pleader, not engaged by the parties in the suit, or a retired judge, or a mediator from the panel as may be prepared by the District Judge under sub-section (10), or any other person whom they may seem to be suitable, to act as a mediator for settlement: Provided that, nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prohibit appointment of more than one person to act as mediator:
 
 
Provided further that, a person holding an office of profit in the service of the Republic shall not be eligible for appointment as mediator.
 
 
66[(3) While referring a dispute or disputes in the suit for mediation under sub-section (1), it shall be for the pleaders, their respective clients and the mediator to mutually agree on and determine the fees and the procedure to be followed for the purpose of settlement through mediation; and when the Court 67[ or Legal Aid Officer] shall mediate, it shall determine the procedure to be followed, and shall not charge any fee for mediation:
 
Provided that if the pleaders, their respective clients and the mediator fail to determine the fees, the Court shall fix the fees and the fees so fixed shall be binding upon the parties.]
 
 
68[(4) Within ten days from the date of reference under sub-section (1), the parties shall inform the Court in writing whom they have appointed as mediator, and if the parties fail to appoint the mediator during this time, the Court shall, within seven days, appoint a mediator from the panel as mentioned in sub-section (10) and the mediation under this section shall be concluded within 60 (sixty) days from the day on which the Court is so informed, 69[or the dispute or disputes are referred to Legal Aid Officer, or a mediator is appointed by the Court], as the case may be, unless the Court of its own motion or upon a joint prayer of the parties, extends the time for a further period of not exceeding 30 (thirty) days.]
 
 
70[(5) The 71[ Legal Aid Officer or mediator, as the case may be,] shall, without violating the confidentiality of the parties to the mediation proceedings, submit to the court a report of result of the mediation proceedings; and if the result is of compromise of the dispute or disputes in the suit, the terms of such compromise shall be reduced into writing in the form of an agreement, bearing signatures or left thumb impressions of the parties as executants, and signatures of the pleaders, if any, and the 72[ Legal Aid Officer or mediator, as the case may be,] as witnesses; and the Court shall, within seven days from receiving the said report, pass an order or a decree in accordance with relevant provisions of Order XXIII of the Code.]
 
 
(6) When the Court itself mediates, it shall 73[prepare a report and pass an order in the manner] to that as stated in sub-section (5).
 
 
(7) When the mediation fails to produce any compromise, the Court shall, subject to the provision of sub-section (9), proceed with hearing of the suit from the stage at which the suit stood before the decision to mediate or reference for mediation under sub-section (1), and in accordance with provisions of the Code in a manner as if there had been no decision to mediate or reference for mediation as aforesaid.
 
 
(8) The proceedings of mediation under this section shall be confidential and any communication made, evidence adduced, admission, statement or comment made and conversation held between the parties, their pleaders, representatives 74[, Legal Aid Officer] and the mediator, shall be deemed privileged and shall not be referred to and admissible in evidence in any subsequent hearing of the same suit or any other proceeding.
 
 
(9) When a mediation initiative led by the Court itself fails to resolve the dispute or disputes in the suit, the same court shall not hear the suit, if the Court continues to be presided by the same judge who led the mediation initiative; and in that instance, the suit shall be heard by another court of competent jurisdiction.
 
 
(10) For the purposes of this section, the District Judge shall, in consultation with the President of the District Bar Association, prepare a panel of mediators (to be updated from time to time) consisting of pleaders, retired judges, persons known to be trained in the art of dispute resolution, and such other person or persons, except persons holding office of profit in the service of the Republic, as may be deemed appropriate for the purpose, and shall inform all the Civil Courts under his administrative jurisdiction about the panel:
 
 
Provided that, a mediator under this sub-section, shall not act as a mediator between the parties, if he had ever been engaged by either of the parties as a pleader in any suit in any Court.
 
 
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Court-fees Act, 1870 (Act No. VII of 1870), where a dispute or disputes in a suit are settled on compromise under this section, the Court shall issue a certificate directing refund of the court fees paid by the parties in respect of the plaint or written statement; and the parties shall be entitled to such refund within 60 (sixty) days of the issuance of the certificate.
 
 
(12) No appeal or revision shall lie against any order or decree passed by the Court in pursuance of settlement between the parties under this section.
 
 
(13) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to otherwise limit the option of the parties regarding withdrawal, adjustment and compromise of the suit under Order XXIII of the Code.
 
 
Explanation-(1) "Mediation" under this section shall mean flexible, informal, non-binding, confidential, non-adversarial and consensual dispute resolution process in which the mediator shall facilitate compromise of disputes in the suit between the parties without directing or dictating the terms of such compromise.
 
 
(2) "Compromise" under this section shall include also compromise in part of the disputes in the suit.
Mediation in Appeal.75[89C.(1) An Appellate Court 76[shall] mediate in an appeal or refer the appeal for mediation in order to settle the dispute or disputes in that appeal, if the appeal is an appeal from original decree under Order XLI, and is between the same parties who contested in the original suit or the parties who have been substituted for the original contesting parties.
 
 
77[(2) In mediation under sub-section (1), the provisions of section 89A shall be followed with necessary changes (mutatis mutandis) as may be expedient.]]

Special provisions for mediation78[89D. The Contesting parties to a suit or of an appeal, pending in any Court before the commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012, may by filing an application stating their willingness to settle the dispute through mediation, such suit or appeal shall be disposed of in accordance with the provision of section 89A or 89C.
Application and commencement of the provisions of sections 89A and 89C89E. (1) The provision of section 89A or 89C shall be, applied to such area, and commenced on such date, as the government may, by notification in the official Gazette, fix.
 
(2) Where any mediation process for settlement of dispute in respect of any suit or appeal is pending under section 89A or 89C before the commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012, such mediation shall continue as if the provision of section 89A or 89C were not amended by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012.]
Special Case

Power to state case for opinion of Court.90. Where any persons agree in writing to state a case for the opinion of the Court, then the Court shall try and determine the same in the manner prescribed.
Suits relating to Public Matters

Public nuisances91.(1) In the case of a public nuisance the 79[Attorney General], or two or more persons having obtained the consent in writing of the 80[Attorney General], may institute a suit, though no special damage has been caused, for a declaration and injunction or for such other relief as may be appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
 
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any right of suit which may exist independently of its provisions.
Public charities92.(1) In the case of any alleged breach of any express or constructive trust created for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature, or where the direction of the Court is deemed necessary for the administration of any such trust, the 81[Attorney General], or two or more persons having an interest in the trust and having obtained the consent in writing of the 82[Attorney General], may institute a suit, whether contentious or not, in the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction or in any other Court empowered in that behalf by the Government within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the subject-matter of the trust is situate, to obtain a decree-
 
 
(a) removing any trustee;
 
 
(b) appointing a new trustee;
 
 
(c) vesting any property in a trustee;
 
 
(d) directing accounts and inquiries;
 
 
(e) declaring what proportion of the trust-property or of the interest therein shall be allocated to any particular object of the trust;
 
 
(f) authorising the whole or any part of the trust- property to be let, sold, mortgaged or exchanged;
 
 
(g) setting a scheme; or
 
 
(h) granting such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.
 
 
(2) Save as provided by the Religious Endowments Act, 1863 (XX of 1863), no suit claiming any of the reliefs specified in sub-section (1) shall be instituted in respect of any such trust as is therein referred to except in conformity with the provisions of that sub-section.
Exercise of powers of Attorney General.93. The powers conferred by sections 91 and 92 on the Attorney General may, be, with the previous sanction of the Government, exercised also by the Collector or by such officer as the Government may appoint in this behalf.
Part VI

SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS


Supplemental proceedings94. In order to prevent the ends of justice from being defeated the Court may, if it is so prescribed,-
 
 
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why he should not give security for his appearance, and if he fails to comply with any order for security commit him to the civil prison;
 
 
(b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property belonging to him and to place the same at the disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property;
 
 
(c) grant a temporary injunction and in case of disobedience commit the person guilty thereof to the civil prison and order that his property be attached and sold;
 
 
(d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his duties by attaching and selling his property;
 
 
(e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the Court to be just and convenient.
Direction in execution of orders, etc
83[94A.  For the purpose of execution of any decree or order, the Court may direct the executive authorities, including law enforcement agencies, to assist any person designated by it and to submit compliance report within the time specified by it.]

Compensation for obtaining arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient grounds.95.(1) Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attachment has been effected or a temporary injunction granted under the last proceeding section,-
 
 
(a) it appears to the Court that such arrest, attachment or injunction was applied for on insufficient grounds, or
 
 
(b) the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appears to the Court that there was no reasonable or probable ground for instituting the same,
 
 
the defendant may apply to the Court, and the Court may, upon such application, award against the plaintiff by its order such amount, not exceeding 84[ten thousand] Taka, as it deems a reasonable compensation to the defendant for the expense or injury caused to him:
 
 
Provided that a Court shall not award, under this section, an amount exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction.
 
 
(2) An order determining any such application shall bar any suit for compensation in respect of such arrest, attachment or injunction.
Part VII

APPEALS

Appeals From Original Decrees

Appeal from original decree.96.(1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie from every decree passed by any Court exercising original jurisdiction to the Court authorised to hear appeals from the decisions of such Court.
 
(2) An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex parte.
 
(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court with the consent of parties.
Appeal from final decree where no appeal from preliminary decree.97. Where any party aggrieved by a preliminary decree passed after the commencement of this Code does not appeal from such decree, he shall be precluded from disputing its correctness in any appeal which may be preferred from the final decree.
Decision where appeal heard by two or more Judges.98.(1) Where an appeal is heard by a Bench of two or more Judges, the appeal shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of the majority (if any) of such Judges.
 
 
(2) Where there is no such majority which concurs in a judgment varying or reversing the decree appealed from, such decree shall be confirmed:
 
 
Provided that where the Bench hearing the appeal is composed of two Judges belonging to a Court consisting of more than two Judges, and the Judges composing the Bench differ in opinion on a point of law, they may state the point of law upon which they differ and the appeal shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other Judges, and such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority (if any) of the Judges who have heard the appeal, including those who first heard it.
 
 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or otherwise affect any provision of the letters patent of High Court Division.
No decree to be reversed or modified for error or irregularity not affecting merits or jurisdiction.99. No decree shall be reserved or substantially varied, nor shall any case be remanded, in appeal on account of any misjoinder of parties or causes of action or any error, defect or irregularity in any proceedings in the suit, not affecting the merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the Court.
Appeals from Appellate Decrees

[Omitted]100-103. [Omitted by section 2 and Schedule of the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1978 (Ordinance No. XLIX of 1978).]
Appeals from Orders

Orders from which appeal lies.104.(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders, and save as otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any law for the time being in force, from no other orders:
 
 
85[* * *]
 
 
86[(ff) an order under section 35A;]
 
 
(g) an order under section 95;
 
 
(h) an order under any of the provisions of this Code imposing a fine or directing the arrest or detention in the civil prison of any person except where such arrest or detention is in execution of a decree;
 
 
(i) any order made under rules from which an appeal is expressly allowed by rules:
 
 
Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order specified in clause (ff) save on the ground that no order, or an order for the payment of a less amount, ought to have been made.
 
 
(2) No appeal shall lie from any order passed in appeal under this section.
Other orders105.(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, no appeal shall lie from any order made by a Court in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction; but, where a decree is appealed from, any error, defect or irregularity in any order, affecting the decision of the case, may be set forth as a ground of objection in the memorandum of appeal.
 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any party aggrieved by an order of remand made after the commencement of this Code from which an appeal lies does not appeal therefrom, he shall thereafter be precluded from disputing its correctness.
What Courts to hear appeals.106. Where an appeal from any order is allowed it shall lie to the Court to which an appeal would lie from the decree in the suit in which such order was made, or where such order is made by a Court not being the High Court Division in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, then to the High Court Division.
General Provisions relating to Appeals

Powers of Appellate Court.107. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, an Appellate Court shall have power-
 
 
(a) to determine a case finally;
 
 
(b) to remand a case;
 
 
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;
 
 
(d) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken.
 
 
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the appellate Court shall have the same powers and shall perform as nearly as may be the same duties as are conferred and imposed by this Code on Courts of original jurisdiction in respect of suits instituted therein.
Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders.108. The provisions of this Part relating to appeals from original decrees shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals-
 
 
(a) from appellate decrees, and
 
 
(b) from orders made under this Code or under any special 87[* * *] law in which a different procedure is not provided.
[Appeals to the Appellate Division]

When appeals lie to the Supreme Court.109. Subject to such rules as may, from time to time, be made by the Supreme Court regarding appeals from the Courts of Bangladesh, and to the provisions hereinafter contained, an appeal shall lie to the 88[Appellate Division]
 
 
(a) from any Judgment, decree or final order passed on appeal by the High Court Division or by any other Court of final appellate jurisdiction;
 
 
(b) from any Judgment, decree or final order passed by the High Court Division in the exercise of original civil jurisdiction; and
 
 
(c) from any Judgment, decree or final order, when the case, as hereinafter provided, is certified to be a fit one for appeal to the 89[Appellate Division].
Value of subject-matter.110. In each of the cases mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of section 109, the amount or value of the subject-matter of the suit in the Court of first instance must be twenty thousand Taka or upwards, and the amount or value of the subject-matter of the suit in the Court of first instance must be twenty thousand Taka or upwards, and the amount or value of the subject-matter in dispute on appeal to the 90[Appellate Division] must be the same sum or upwards,
 
 
or the Judgment, decree or final order must involve, directly or indirectly, some claim or question to or respecting property of like amount or value,
 
 
and where the Judgment, decree or final order appealed from affirms the decision of the Court immediately below the Court passing such Judgment, decree or final order, the appeal must involve some substantial question of law.
Bar of certain appeals.111. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 109, no appeal shall lie to the 91[Appellate Division]-
 
 
(a) from the decree or order of one Judge of the High Court Division, or of one Judge of a Division Court, or of two or more Judges of High Court Division, or of a Division Court constituted by two or more Judges of High Court Division, where such Judges are equally divided in opinion and do not amount in number to a majority of the whole of the Judges of the High Court Division at the time being; or
 
 
92[* * *]
111A [Omitted]111A. [Omitted by section 2 of the Federal Court Act, 1941 (Act No. XXI of 1941).]
Savings112.(1) Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed-
 
 
(a) to affect the powers of the 93[Appellate Division under article 103 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh] or any other provision of that Constitution; or
 
 
(b) to interfere with any rules made by the Supreme Court, and for the time being in force, for the presentation of appeals 94[to the Appellate Division], or their conduct 95[before that Division].
 
 
(2) Nothing herein contained applies to any matter of criminal or admiralty or vice-admiralty jurisdiction, or to appeals from orders and decrees of Prize Courts.
Part VIII

REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION


Reference of High Court Division.113. Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, any Court may state a case and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court Division, and the High Court Division may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.
Review114. Subject as aforesaid, any person considering himself aggrieved-
 
 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but from which no appeal has been preferred,
 
 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Code, or
 
 
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes
 
 
may apply for a view of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order, and the Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.
Revision96[115.(1) The High Court Division may, on the application of any party aggrieved, call for the record of any suit or proceedings, in which a decree or an order has been passed by a Court of District Judge or Additional District Judge, or a decree has been passed by a Court of Joint District Judge, Senior Assistant Judge or Assistant Judge, from which no appeal lies; and if such Court appears to have committed any error of law resulting in an error in such decree or order occasioning failure of justice, the High Court Division may, revise such decree or order and, make such order in the suit or proceedings, as it thinks fit.
 
 
(2) The Court of District Judge may, on the application of any party aggrieved, call for the record of any suit or proceeding, in which an order has been passed by a Court of Joint District Judge, Senior Assistant Judge or Assistant Judge, from which no appeals lies; and if such Court appears to have committed any error of law resulting in an error in such order occasioning failure of justice, the Court of District Judge may, revise such order and, make such order as it thinks fit.
 
 
(3) A Court of Additional District Judge shall have all the powers of the District Judge under sub-section (2) in respect of revision case which may be transferred to it by the District Judge.
 
 
(4) An application to the High Court Division for revision of an order of the District Judge or, Additional District Judge, as the case may be, made under sub-section (2) or (3) shall lie, where the High Court Division grants leave for revision on an (4) An application to the High Court Division for revision of an order of the District Judge or, Additional District Judge, as the case may be, made under sub-section (2) or (3) shall lie, where the High Court Division grants leave for revision on an error of an important question of law resulting in erroneous decision occasioning failure of justice, and the High Court Division may make such order in the suit or proceeding as it thinks fit.
 
 
(5) Notwithstanding the substitution of this section, any proceeding commenced and pending under section 115 prior to such substitution shall be disposed of in such manner as if section 115 has not been substituted.]
Part IX

SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO HIGH COURT DIVISION

Part to apply only to certain High Court Division.116. This Part applies only to High Court Division.
Application of Code to High Court Division.117. Save as provided in this Part or in Part X or in rules, the provisions of this Code shall apply to High Court Division.
Execution of decree before ascertainment of costs.118. Where any High Court Division considers it necessary that a decree passed in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction should be executed before the amount of the costs incurred in the suit can be ascertained by taxation, the Court may order that the decree shall be executed forthwith, except as to so much thereof as relates to the costs;
 
 
and, as to so much thereof as relates to the costs, that the decree may be executed as soon as the amount of the costs shall be ascertained by taxation.
Unauthorised persons not to Address Court.119. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to authorise any person on behalf of another to address the Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, or to examine witnesses, except where the Court shall have in the exercise of the power conferred by its charter authorised him so to do, or to interfere with the power of the High Court Division to make rules concerning advocates 97[* **].
Provisions not applicable to High Court Division in original civil jurisdiction.120.(1) The following provisions shall not apply to the High Court Division in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, namely, sections 16, 17 and 20.
Part X

RULES

Effect of rules in First Schedule.121. The rules in the First Schedule shall have effect as if enacted in the body of this Code until annulled or altered in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
Power of Supreme Court to make rules.98[122. The Supreme Court may, from time to time after previous publication, make rules regulating the procedure of each Division of the Supreme Court and the procedure of Civil Courts subject to its Superintendence and may by such rules annul, alter or add to all or any of the rules in the First Schedule.]
Constitution of Rule Committees.123.(1) A Committee, to be called the Rule Committee, shall be constituted 99[for the purpose] referred to in section 122.
 
 
100[(2) Such Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely:-
 
 
(a) three Judges of the Supreme Court, one of whom at least has served as a District Judge for three years;
 
 
(b) two advocates parctising in that Court; and
 
 
(c) a Judge of a Civil Court subordinate to the High Court Division.]
 
 
(3) The members of 101[* * *] such Committee shall be appointed by the Chief Justice, who shall also nominate one of their number to be president:
 
 
Provided that, if the Chief Justice elects to be himself a member of 102[the Committee], the number of other Judges appointed to be members shall be two, and the Chief Justice shall be the President of the Committee.
 
 
(4) Each member of 103[such committee] shall hold office for such period as may be prescribed by the Chief Justice in this behalf; and whenever any member retires, resigns, dies 104[* * *] or becomes incapable of acting as a member of the Committee, the said Chief Justice may appoint another person to be a member in his stead.
 
 
(5) There shall be a Secretary to 105[* * *] such Committee, who shall be appointed by the Chief Justice and shall receive such remuneration as may be provided in this behalf by the Government.
Committee to report to Supreme Court.124. 106[The] Rule Committee shall make a report to the 107[Supreme Court] 108[* **] on any proposal to annul, alter or add to the rules in the First Schedule or to make new rules, and before making any rules under section 122 the [Supreme Court] shall take such report into consideration.
[Omitted]125. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (Ordinance No. XXI of 1960).]
Rules to be subject to approval.109[126. Rules made under the foregoing provisions shall be subject to the previous approval of the President.].
Publication of rules.127. Rules so made and approved shall be published in the official Gazette, and shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may be specified have the same force and effect 110[* * *] as if they had been contained in the First Schedule.
Matters for which rules may provide.
 
128.(1) Such rules shall be not inconsistent with the provisions in the body of this Code, but, subject thereto, may provide for any matters relating to the procedure of Civil Courts.
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1), such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely;-
 
(a) the service of summonses, notices and other processes by post or in any other manner either generally or in any specified areas, and the proof of such service;
 
(b) the maintenance and custody, while under attachment, of live-stock and other movable property, the fees payable for such maintenance and custody, the sale of such live-stock and property, and the proceeds of such sale;
 
(c) procedure in suits by way of counterclaim, and the valuation of such suits for the purposes of jurisdiction;
 
(d) procedure in garnishee and charging orders either in addition to, or in substitution for, the attachment and sale of debts;
 
(e) procedure where the defendant claims to be entitled to contribution or indemnity over against any person whether a party to the suit or not;
 
(f) summary procedure-
 
(i) in suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable by the defendant, with or without interest, arising-
 
on a contract express or implied; or
 
on an enactment where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the nature of a debt other than a penalty; or
 
on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or a liquidated demand only; or
 
on a trust; or
 
.
 
(ii) in suits for the recovery of immovable property, with or without a claim for rent or mesne profits, by a landlord against a tenant whose term has expired or has been duly determined by notice to quit, or has become liable to forfeiture for non-payment of rent, or against persons claiming under such tenant;
 
(g) procedure by way of originating summons;
 
(h) consolidation of suits, appeals and other proceedings;
 
(i) delegation to any Registrar, Prothonotary or master or other official of the Court of any judicial, quasi-judicial and non-judicial duties; and
 
(j) all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be necessary or desirable for the transaction of the business of Civil Courts.
[Omitted]129. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
[Omitted]130. [Omitted by Article 2 and Schedule of the Central Laws (Adaptation) Order, 1961.]
[Omitted]131. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]
Part XI

MISCELLANEOUS

Exemption of certain women from personal appearance.132.(1) Women who, according to the customs and manners of the country, ought not to be compelled to appear in public shall be exempt from personal appearance in Court.
 
 
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt such women from arrest in execution of civil process in any case in which the arrest of women is not prohibited by this Code.
Exemption of other persons.133.(1) The Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, exempt from personal appearance in Court any person whose rank, in the opinion of 111[the Government], entitles him to the privilege of exemption.
 
 
(2) The names and residences of the persons so exempted shall, from time to time, be forwarded to the High Court Division by the Government and a list of such persons shall be kept in such Court, and a list of such persons as reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of each Court subordinate to the High Court Division shall be kept in such subordinate Court.
 
 
(3) Where any person so exempted claims the privilege of such exemption, and it is consequently necessary to examine him by commission, he shall pay the costs of that commission, unless the party requiring his evidence pays such costs.
Arrest other than in execution of decree.134. The provisions of sections 55, 57 and 59 shall apply, so far as may be, to all persons arrested under this Code.
Exemption from arrest under civil process.135.(1) No Judge, Magistrate or other judicial officer shall be liable to arrest under civil process while going to, presiding in, or returning from, his Court.
 
 
(2) Where any matter is pending before a tribunal having jurisdiction therein, or believing in good faith that it has such jurisdiction, the parties thereto, their pleaders, mukhtars, revenue-agents and recognised agents, and their witnesses acting in obedience to a summons, shall be exempt from arrest under civil process other than process issued by such tribunal for contempt of Court while going to or attending such tribunal for the purpose of such matter, and while returning from such tribunal.
 
 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall enable a judgment-debtor to claim exemption from arrest under an order for immediate execution or where such judgment-debtor attends to show cause why he should not be committed to prison in execution of a decree.
Exemption of members of legislative bodies from arrest and detention under civil process.112[135A.(1) No person shall be liable to arrest or detention in prison under civil process-
 
 
(a) if he is a member of 113[Parliament] during the continuance of any meeting of 114[Parliament];
 
 
(b) if he is a member of any committee of 115[Parliament], during the continuance of any meeting of such committee;
 
 
and during the fourteen days before and after such meeting or sitting.
 
 
(2) A person released from detention under sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions of the said sub-section, be liable to re-arrest and to the further detention to which he would have been liable if he had not been released under the provisions of sub-section (1).]
Procedure where person to be arrested or property to be attached is outside district.136.(1) Where an application is made that any person shall be arrested or that any property shall be attached under any provision of this Code not relating to the execution of decrees, and such person resides or such property is situate outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court to which the application is made, the Court may, in its discretion, issue a warrant of arrest or make an order of attachment, and send to the District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such person or property resides or is situate a copy of the warrant or order, together with the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment.
 
 
(2) The District Court shall, on receipt of such copy and amount, cause the arrest or attachment to be made by its own officers, or by a Court subordinate to itself, and shall inform the Court which issued or made such warrant or order of the arrest or attachment.
 
 
(3) The Court making an arrest under this section shall send the person arrested to the Court by which the warrant of arrest was issued, unless he shows cause to the satisfaction of the former Court why he should not be sent to the latter Court, or unless he furnishes sufficient security for his appearance before the latter Court or for satisfying any decree that may be passed against him by that Court, in either of which cases the Court making the arrest shall release him.
Language of subordinate Courts.137.(1) The language which, on the commencement of this Code, is the language of any Court subordinate to the High Court Division shall continue to be the language of such subordinate Court until the Government otherwise directs.
 
 
(2) The Government may declare what shall be the language of any such Court and in what character applications to and proceedings in such Courts shall be written.
 
 
(3) Where this Code requires or allows anything other than the recording of evidence to be done in writing in any such Court, such writing may be in English; but if any party or his pleader is unacquainted with English a translation into the language of the Court shall, at his request, be supplied to him; and the Court shall make such order as it thinks fit in respect of the payment of the costs of such translation.
Power of High Court Division to require evidence to be recorded in English.138.(1) The High Court Division may, by notification in the official Gazette, direct with respect to any Judge specified in the notification, or falling under a description set forth therein, that evidence in cases in which an appeal is allowed shall be taken down by him in the English language and in manner prescribed.
 
 
(2) Where a Judge is prevented by any sufficient reason from complying with a direction under sub-section (1), he shall record the reason and cause the evidence to be taken down in writing from his dictation in open Court.
Oath on affidavit by whom to be administered.139. In the case of any affidavit under this Code-
 
 
(a) any Court or Magistrate, or
 
 
(b) any officer or other person whom 116[the Supreme Court] may appoint in this behalf, or
 
 
(c) any officer appointed by any other Court which the Government has generally or specially empowered in this behalf,
 
 
may administer the oath to the deponent.
Assessors in causes of salvage, etc.140.(1) In any Admiralty or Vice-Admiralty cause of salvage, towage or collision, the Court, whether it be exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction, may, if it thinks fit, and shall upon request of either party to such cause, summon to its assistance, in such manner as it may direct or as may be prescribed, two competent assessors; and such assessors shall attend and assist accordingly.
 
 
(2) Every such assessor shall receive such fees for his attendance, to be paid by such of the parties as the Court may direct or as may be prescribed.
Miscellaneous proceedings.141. The procedure provided in this Code in regard to suits shall be followed, as far as it can be made applicable, in all proceedings in any Court of civil jurisdiction.
Orders and notices to be in writing.142. All orders and notices served on or given to any person under the provisions of this Code shall be in writing.
Postage143. Postage, where chargeable on a notice, summons or letter issued under this Code and forwarded by post, and the fee for registering the same, shall be paid within a time to be fixed before the communication is made:
 
 
Provided that the Government may remit such postage, or fee, or both, or may prescribed a scale of court-fees to be levied in lieu thereof.
Application for restitution.144.(1) Where and in so far as a decree is varied or reversed, the Court of first instance shall, on the application of any party entitled to any benefit by way of restitution or otherwise, cause such restitution to be made as will, so far as may be, place the parties in the position which they would have occupied but for such decree or such part thereof as has been varied or reversed; and, for this purpose, the Court may make any orders, including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of interest, damages, compensation and mesne profits, which are properly consequential on such variation or reversal.
 
 
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any restitution or other relief which could be obtained by application under sub-section (1).
Enforcement of liability of surety.145. Where any person has become liable as surety-
 
 
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part thereof, or
 
 
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree, or
 
 
(c) for the payment of any money, or for the fulfilment of any condition imposed on any person, under an order of the Court in any suit or in any proceedings consequent thereon,
 
 
the decree or order may be executed against him, to the extent to which he has rendered himself personally liable, in the manner herein provided for the execution of decrees, and such person shall, for the purposes of appeal, be deemed a party within the meaning of section 47:
 
 
Provided that such notice as the Court in each case thinks sufficient has been given to the surety.
Proceedings by or against representatives.146. Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any law for the time being in force, where any proceeding may be taken or application made by or against any person, then the proceeding may be taken or the application may be made by or against any person claiming under him.
Consent or agreement by persons under disability.147. In all suits to which any person under disability is a party, any consent or agreement, as to any proceeding shall, if given or made with the express leave of the Court by the next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect as if such person, were under no disability and had given such consent or made such agreement.
Enlargement of time.148. Where any period is fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act prescribed or allowed by this Code, the Court may, in its discretion, from time to time, enlarge such period, even though the period originally fixed or granted may have expired.
Power to make up deficiency of court-fees.149. Where the whole or any part of any fee prescribed for any document by the law for the time being in force relating to court-fees has not been paid, the Court may, in its discretion, at any stage, allow the person, by whom such fee is payable, to pay the whole or part, as the case may be, of such court-fee; and upon such payment the document, in respect of which such fee is payable, shall have the same force and effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.
Transfer of business.150. Save as otherwise provided, where the business of any Court is transferred to any other Court, the Court to which the business is so transferred shall have the same powers and shall perform the same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Code upon the Court from which the business was so transferred.
Saving of inherent powers of Court.151. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Court.
Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders.152. Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in judgments, decrees or orders or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any time be corrected by the Court either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.
General power to amend.153. The Court may at any time, and on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, amend any defect or error in any proceeding in a suit; and all necessary amendments shall be made for the purpose of determining the real question or issue raised by or depending on such proceeding.
Saving of present right of appeal.154. Nothing in this Code shall affect any present right of appeal which shall have accrued to any party at its commencement.
Amendment of certain Acts.155. The enactments mentioned in the Fourth Schedule are hereby amended to the extent specified in the fourth column thereof.
[Repealed]156. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (Act No. XVII of 1914).]
[Omitted]157-158. [Omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).]

1 The words and figure "section 47 or" were omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983)
2 The commas and words ", and includes an advocate, a vakil and an attorney of a High Court" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
3 The words "The Republic" were substituted, for the words "Pakistan" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
4 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
5 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "Government" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
6 The words "or local" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
7 The word "local" was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
8 The word "Provincial" was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
9 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
10 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
11 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
12 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
13 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
14 The words "Bangladesh Biman" were substituted, for the words "Pakistan International Airways" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
15 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
16 The words "Cox's Bazar" were substituted, for the word "Muree" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
17 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
18 The word "Khulna" was substituted, for the word "Bahawalpur" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
19 The words "at Khulna" was substituted, for the word "Bahawalpur" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
20 The word "Chittagong" was substituted, for the word "Karachi" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
21 The words "but to the same High Court" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
22 The word "said" was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
23 Section 24A was inserted by section 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962 (Ordinance No. XLIV of 1962)
24 Sub-section (1) was numbered by section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
25 Sub-section (2) was added by section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
26 The word "Government" was substituted, for the words "Courts issuing such summons of processes have been established or continued by the authority of the Central Government or that the Provincial Government of the Province in which such summonses or processes are to be served" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
27 Section 35A was substituted, by section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
28 The word “fifty” was substituted for the word “twenty” by section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
29 Section 35B was inserted by section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
30 The words and comma "or by any Court established or continued by the authority of the Central Government in any Acceding State," were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
31 Section 44A was inserted by section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1937 (Act No. VIII of 1937)
32 The words "the United Kingdom or" were omitted by section 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment), 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
33 Explanation 1 was omitted by section 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
34 The word "any" was substituted, for the words "the United Kingdom and such other" by section 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
35 Clause (a) of explanation 3 was omitted by section 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
36 The words and comma “as may be provided hereinafter in the Code or” was inserted after the word “manner” by section 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
37 The words and commas “an old, infirm, pregnant or breast-feeding woman” were substituted for the words “a woman” by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
38 Section 57 was omitted by section 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
39 The colon “:” was substituted for the comma and word “, or” by section 7(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
40 Clause (iv) was omitted by section 7(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
41 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
42 The words "the Railway" were substituted, for the words "a railway" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
43 The words, commas and figures "Army Act, 1952, Navy Ordinance, 1961, or the Air Force Act, 1953," were substituted, for the words, commas, figures and brackets "Pakistan Army Act, 1952, applies, or of persons other than commissioned officers to whom the Naval Discipline Act as modified by the Pakistan Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934," by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
44 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
45 The words "the Railway" were substituted, for the words "a railway" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
46 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
47 The words "the Railway" were substituted, for the words "a railway" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
48 Explanation 3 was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
49 Clause (b) was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
50 The words "shall be Bangladesh" were substituted, for the words "shall be" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
51 Clause (a) and (b) were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
52 Clauses (a) was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
53 The words "the Railway" were substituted, for the words "a railway" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
54 The words "the Government" were substituted, for the words "that Government" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
55 The words "the Railway" were substituted, for the words "a railway" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
56 The word "concerned" was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
57 The word "Bangladesh" was substituted, for the words "the Provinces" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
58 The word "Bangladesh" was substituted, for the words "the Provinces" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
59 The word "Bangladesh" was substituted, for the words "the Provinces" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
60 Sections 86 and 86A were substituted, for the original section 86 by section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1970 (Ordinance No. VI of 1970)
61 Sections 89A and 89B were inserted by section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. IV of 2003)
62 The words, comma, figures and bracket “Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 (Act No. 8 of 2003)” were substituted for the words, comma, figures and bracket “Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 1990 (Act No. 4 of 1990)” by section 2(a)(i) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
63 The words “the Court shall” were substituted for the words “the Court may” by section 2(a)(ii) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
64 The words, commas, figures and breakets “to the concerned Legal Aid Officer appointed under the Legal Aid Act, 2000 (Act No. 6 of 2000), or” were inserted after the words “or refer the dispute or disputes in the suit” by section 2(a) of Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
65 The full-stop (.) was substituted for the colon (:) and thereafter the proviso was omitted by section 2(a)(iii) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
66 Sub-section (3) was substituted by section 2(b) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
67 The words “or Legal Aid Officer” were inserted after the words “when the court” by section 2(b) of Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
68 Sub-section (4) was substituted by section 2(c) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
69 The words and comma “or the dispute or disputes are referred to Legal Aid Officer, or a mediator is appointed by the Court” were substituted for the words “or a mediator is appointed by the Court” by section 2(c) of Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
70 Sub-section (5) was substituted by section 2(d) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
71 The words and commas “Legal Aid Officer or mediator, as the case may be,” were substituted for the word “mediator” by section 2(d) of Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
72 The words and commas “Legal Aid Officer or mediator, as the case may be,” were substituted for the word “mediator” by section 2(d) of Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
73 The words “prepare a report and pass an order in the manner” were substituted for the words “make a report and passed order in a manner similar” by section 2(e) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
74 The comma and words “, Legal Aid Officer” were inserted after the word “representatives” by section 2(e) of Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
75 Section 89C was inserted by section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006)
76 The word “shall” was substituted for the word “may” by section 3(a) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
77 Sub-section (2) was substituted by section 3(b) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
78 Section 89D and 89E were inserted by section 4 of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
79 The words "Attorney General" were substituted, for the words "Advocate General" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
80 The words "Attorney General" were substituted, for the words "Advocate General" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
81 The words "Attorney General" were substituted, for the words "Advocate General" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
82 The words "Attorney General" were substituted, for the words "Advocate General" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
83 Section 94A was inserted by section 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
84 The words "ten thousand" were substituted, for the words "one thousand" by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
85 Clause (a) to (f) were omitted by section 49 and 3rd Schedule of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (Act No. X of 1940)
86 Clause (ff) was inserted by section 3 of the Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Act No. IX of 1922)
87 The words "or local" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
88 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
89 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
90 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
91 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
92 Clause (b) was omitted by the Schedule of the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1978 (Ordinance No. XLIX of 1978)
93 The words and figure "Appellate Division under article 103 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh" were substituted, for the words and figure "Supreme Court under Article 158 of the Constitution" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
94 The words "to the Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "to that Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
95 The words "before that Division" were substituted, for the words "before that Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
96 Section 115 was substituted, by section 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003)
97 The comma and words ", vakils and attorneys" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
98 Section 122 was substituted, for the original section 122 by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
99 The words "for the purpose" were substituted, for the words "at the town which is the usual place of siting of each of the High Courts" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
100 Sub-section (2) was substituted, by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
101 The word "each" was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
102 The words "the Committee" were substituted, for the words "a Committee" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
103 The words "such Committee" were substituted, for the words "any such Committee" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
104 The words and comma "or ceases to reside in the Province in which the Committee was constituted," were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
105 The word "each" was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
106 The word "The" was substituted, for the word "Every" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
107 The words "Supreme Court" were substituted, for the words "High Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
108 The words "established at the town at which it is constituted" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
109 The words "Supreme Court" were substituted, for the words "High Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
110 The commas and words ", within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court which made them," were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
111 The words "the Government" were substituted, for the words "such Government" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
112 Section 135A was inserted by section 3 of the Legislative Members Exemption Act, 1925 (Act No. XXIII of 1925)
113 The word "Parliament" was substituted, for the letter and word "a Legislature" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
114 The word "Parliament" was substituted, for the words "such Legislature" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
115 The word "Parliament" was substituted, for the words "such Legislature" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)
116 The words "the Supreme Court" were substituted, for the letter and word "a High Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision And Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973)

Copyright © 2019, Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division
Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs





THE FIRST SCHEDULE
ORDER I
PARTIES TO SUITS
RULES
1. Who may be joined as plaintiffs.
2. Power of Court to order separate trials.
3. Who may be joined as defendants.
4. Court may give judgment for or against one or more of
joint parties.
5. Defendant need not be interested in all the relief claimed.
6. Joinder of parties liable on same contract.
7. When plaintiff in doubt from whom redress is to be
sought.
8. One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same
interest.
9. Misjoinder and nonjoinder.
10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff.
Court may strike out or add parties.
Where defendant added, plaint to be amended.
11. Conduct of suit.
12. Appearance of one of several plaintiffs or defendants for
others.
13. Objections as to nonjoinder or misjoinder.
ORDER II
FRAME OF SUIT
1. Frame of suit.
2. Suit to include the whole claim.
Relinquishment of part of claim.
Omission to sue for one of several reliefs.
3. Joinder of causes of action.
4. Only certain claims to be joined for recovery of
immoveable property.
5. Claims by or against executor, administrator or heir.
6. Power of Court to order separate trials.
7. Objections as to misjoinder.
ORDER III
RECOGNIZED AGENTS AND PLEADERS
RULES
1. Appearances, etc., may be in person, by recognized agent
or by pleader.
2. Recognized agents.
3. Service of process on recognized agent.
4. Appointment of pleader.
5. Service of process on pleader.
6. Agent to accept service.
Appointment to be in writing and to be filed in Court.
ORDER IV
INSTITUTION OF SUITS
1. Suit to be commenced by plaint.
2. Register of suits.
ORDER V
ISSUE AND SERVICE SUMMONS
Issue of Summons
1. Summons.
2. Copy or statement annexed to summons.
3. Court may order defendant or plaintiff to appear in
person.
4. No party to be ordered to appear in person unless resident
within certain limits.
5. Summons to be either to settle issues or for final disposal.
6. Fixing day for appearance of defendant.
7. Summons to order defendant to produce documents relied
on by him.
8. On issue of summons for final disposal, defendant to be
directed to produce his witnesses.
Service of Summons
9. Delivery or transmission of summons for service.
9A. Summons given to the plaintiff for service.
10. Mode of service.
11. Service on several defendants.
12. Service to be on defendant in person when practicable or
on his agent.
.
RULES
13. Service on agent by whom defendant carries on business.
14. Service on agent in charge in suits for immoveable
property.
15. Where service may be on adult member of defendant's
family.
16. Person served to sign acknowledgment.
17. Procedure when defendant refuses to accept service, or
cannot be found.
18. Endorsement of time and manner of service.
19. Examination of serving officer.
19A. Declaration of serving officer.
19B. Simultaneous issue of summons for service by post in
addition to personal service.
20. Substituted service.
Effect of substituted service.
Where service substituted, time for appearance to be fixed.
21. Service of summons where defendant resides within
jurisdiction of another Court.
22. [Omitted]
23. Duty of Court to which summons is sent.
24. Service on defendant in prison.
25. Service where defendant resides out of Bangladesh and has
no agent.
26. Service in foreign territory through Political Agent or
Court.
26A. [Omitted]
27. Service on civil public officer or on servant of railway
company or local authority.
28. Service on soldiers, sailors or airmen.
29. Duty of person to whom summons is delivered or sent for
service.
30. Substitution of letter for summons.
31. Service of summons when completed.
.
ORDER VI
PLEADING GENERALLY
RULES
1. Pleading.
2. Pleading to state material facts and not evidence.
3. Forms of pleading.
4. Particulars to be given where necessary.
5. Further and better statement, or particulars.
6. Condition precedent.
7. Departure.
8. Denial of contract.
9. Effect of document to be stated.
10. Malice, knowledge, etc.
11. Notice.
12. Implied contract, or relation.
13. Presumptions of law.
14. Pleading to be signed.
15. Verification of pleadings.
16. Striking out pleadings.
17. Amendment of pleadings.
18. Failure to amend after order.
ORDER VII
PLAINT
1. Particulars to be contained in plaint.
2. In money suits.
3. Where the subject-matter of the suit is immoveable
property.
4. When plaintiff sues as representative.
5. Defendant's interest and liability to be shown.
6. Grounds of exemption from limitation law.
7. Relief to be specifically stated.
8. Relief founded on separate grounds.
9. Procedure of admitting plaint.
Concise statements.
.
RULES
10. Return of plaint.
Procedure on returning plaint.
11. Rejection of plaint.
12. Procedure on rejecting plaint.
13. Where rejection of plaint does not preclude
presentation of fresh plaint.
Documents Relied on in Plaint
14. Production of documents along with the plaint.
15. Statement in case of documents not in plaintiff's
possession or power.
16. Suits on lost negotiable instruments.
17. Production of shop-book.
Original entry to be marked and returned.
18. Inadmissibility of document not produced when plaint
field.
ORDER VIII
WRITTEN STATEMENT AND SET-OFF
1. Written statement.
2. New facts must be specially pleaded.
3. Denial to be specific.
4. Evasive denial.
5. Specific denial.
6. Particulars of set-off to be given in written statement.
Effect of set-off.
7. Defence or set-off founded on separate grounds.
8. New ground of defence.
9. Subsequent pleadings.
10. Procedure when party fails to present written
statement called for by Court.
ORDER IX
APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCE OF
NON-APPEARANCE.
RULES
1. Parties to appear on day fixed in summons for defendant
to appear and answer.
2. Dismissal of suit where summons not served in
consequence of plaintiff's failure to pay costs.
3. Where neither party appears, suit to be dismissed.
4. Plaintiff may bring fresh suit or Court may restore suit to
file.
5. Dismissal of suit where plaintiff, after summons returned
unserved, fails for one month to apply for fresh summons.
6. Procedure When only plaintiff appears.
When summons duly served.
When summons not duly served.
When summons served, but not in due time.
7. Procedure where defendant appears on day or adjourned
hearing and assigns good cause for previous nonappearance.
8. Procedure where defendant only appears.
9. Decree against plaintiff by default bars fresh suit.
9A. Directly setting aside dismissal.
10. Procedure in case of non-attendance of one or more of
several plaintiffs.
11. Procedure in case of non-attendance of one or more of
several defendants.
12. Consequence of non-attendance, without sufficient cause
shown, of party ordered to appear in person.
Setting aside Decrees Ex-parte
13. Setting aside decree ex parte against defendant.
13A.Directly setting aside ex parte decree.
14. No decree to be set aside without notice to opposite party.
ORDER X
EXAMINATION OF PARTIES BY THE COURT
RULES
1. Ascertainment whether allegations in pleadings are
admitted or denied.
2. Oral examination of Party or companion of party.
3. Substance of examination to be written.
4. Consequence of refusal or inability of pleader to answer.
ORDER XI
DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
1. Discovery by interrogatories.
2. Particular interrogatories to be submitted.
3. Costs of interrogatories.
4. Form of interrogatories.
5. Corporations.
6. Objections to interrogatories by answer.
7. Setting aside and striking out interrogatories.
8. Affidavit in answer, filing.
9. Form of affidavit in answer.
10. No exception to be taken.
11. Order to answer or answer further.
12. Application for discovery of documents.
13. Affidavit of documents.
14. Production of documents.
15. Inspection of documents referred to in pleadings or
affidavits.
16. Notice to produce.
17. Time for inspection when notice given.
18. Order for inspection.
19. Verified copies.
.
RULES
20. Premature discovery.
21. Non-compliance with order for discovery.
22. Using answers to interrogatories at trial.
23. Order to apply to minors.
ORDER XII
ADMISSIONS
1. Notice of admission of case.
2. Notice of admit documents.
3. Form of notice.
4. Notice of admit facts.
5. Form of admissions.
6. Judgment on admissions.
7. Affidavit of signature.
8. Notice to produce documents.
9. Costs.
ORDER XIII
PRODUCTION, IMPOUNDING AND RETURN OF DOCUMENTS
1. [Omitted]
2. [Omitted]
3. Rejection of irrelevant or inadmissible documents.
4. Endorsement on irrelevant or inadmissible documents.
5. Endorsements on copies of admitted entries in books,
accounts and records.
6. Endorsements on documents rejected as inadmissible
in evidence.
7. Recording of admitted and return of rejected
documents.
8. Court may order any document to be impounded.
9. Return of admitted documents.
10. Court may send for papers from is own records or
from other Courts.
11. Provisions as to documents applied to material objects.
.
ORDER XIV
SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES AND DETERMINATION OF SUIT ON ISSUES OF
LAW OR ON ISSUES AGREED UPON
RULES
1. Framing to issues.
2. Issues of law and of fact.
3. Materials from which issues may be framed.
4. Court may examined witnesses or documents before
framing issues.
5. Power to amend, and strike out, issues.
6. Questions of fact or law may by agreement be stated in
form of issues.
7. Court, if satisfied that agreement was executed in good
faith, may pronounce judgment.
8. Fixing date for final hearing.
ORDER XV
DISPOSAL OF THE SUIT AT THE FIRST HEARING
1. Parties not at issue.
2. One of several defendants not at issue.
3. Parties at issue.
4. Failure to produce evidence.
ORDER XVI
SUMMONING AND ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES
1. Summons to attend to give evidence or produce
documents.
2. Expenses of witness to be paid into Court on applying
for summons.
Experts.
Scale of expenses.
3. Tender of expenses to witness.
4. Procedure where insufficient sum paid in.
Expenses of witnesses detained more than one day.
5. Time, place and purpose of attendance to be specified
in summons.
6. Summons to produce document.
RULES
7. Power to require persons present in Court to give
evidence or produce document.
8. Summons how served.
9. Time for serving summons.
10. Procedure where witness fails to comply with summons.
11. If witness appears, attachment may be withdraw.
12. Procedure if witness fails to appear.
13. Mode of attachment.
14. Court may of its own accord summon as witnesses
strangers to suit.
15. Duty of persons summoned to give evidence or produce
document.
16. When they may depart.
17. Application of rules 10 to 13.
18. Procedure where witness apprehended cannot give
evidence or produce document.
19. No witness to be ordered to attend in person unless
resident within certain limits.
20. Consequence of refusal of party to give evidence when
called on by Court.
21. Rules as to witnesses to apply to parties summoned.
ORDER XVII
ADJOURNMENTS
1. Court may grant time and adjourn hearing.
Costs of adjournment.
2. Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed.
3. Court may proceed notwithstanding either party fails to
produce evidence, etc.
ORDER XVIII
HEARING OF THE SUIT AND EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
1. Right to begin.
2. Statement and production of evidence.
RULES
3. Evidence where several issues.
4. Witnesses to be examined in open Court.
5. How evidence shall be taken in appealable cases.
6. When deposition to be interpreted.
7. Evidence under section 138.
8. Memorandum when evidence not taken down by
Judge.
9. When evidence may be taken in English.
10. Any particular question and answer may be taken
down.
11. Question objected to and allowed by Court.
12. Remarks on demeanour of witnesses.
13. Memorandum of evidence in unappealable cases.
14. Judge unable to make such memorandum to record
reasons of his inability.
15. Power to deal with evidence taken before another
Judge.
16. Power to examine witness immediately.
17. Court may recall and examine witness.
18. Power of Court to inspect.
19. Time for completion of hearing.
20. Fixation of suits in the daily cause list, etc.
ORDER XIX
AFFIDAVITS
1. Power to order any point to be proved by affidavit.
2. Power to order attendance of deponent for crossexamination.
3. Matters of which affidavits shall be confined.
ORDER XX
JUDGMENT AND DECREE
1. Judgment when pronounced.
2. Power to pronounce judgment written by Judge's
predecessor.
3. Judgment to be singed.
.
RULES
4. Judgments of Small Cause Courts.
Judgments of other Courts.
5. Court to state its decision on each issue.
5A. Time for drawn up a decree.
6. Contents of decree.
7. Date of decree.
8. Procedure where judge has vacated office before signing
decree.
9. Decree for recovery of immoveable property.
10. Decree for delivery of moveable property.
11. Decree may direct payment by instalments,
Order, after decree, for payment by instalments.
12. Decree for possession and mesne profits.
13. Decree in administration suit.
14. Decree in pre-emption-suit.
15. Decree in suit for dissolution of partnership.
16. Decree in suit for account between principal and agent.
17. Special directions as to accounts.
18. Decree in suit for partition of property or separate
possession of a share therein.
19. Decree when set-off is allowed.
Appeal from decree relating to set-off.
20. Certified copies of judgment and decree to be furnished.
ORDER XXI
EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDERS
Payment under Decree
1. Modes of paying money under decree.
2. Payment out of Court to decree-holder.
Courts Executing Decrees
3. Lands situate in more than on jurisdiction.
.
RULES
4. [Omitted]
5. Mode of transfer.
6. Procedure where Court desires than its own decree shall
be executed by another Court.
7. Court receiving copies of decree, etc., to file same without
proof.
8. Execution of decree or order by Court to which it is sent.
9. Execution by High Court Division of decree transferred
by other Court.
Application for Execution
10. Application for execution.
11. Oral application.
Written application.
12. Application for attachment of moveable property not in
judgment-debtor's possession.
13. Application for attachment of immoveable property to
contain certain particulars.
14. Power to require certified extract from Collector's register
in certain cases.
15. Application for execution by joint decree-holder.
16. Application for execution by transferee of decree.
17. Procedure on receiving application for execution of
decree.
18. Execution in case of cross-decrees.
19. Execution in case of cross-claims under same decree.
20. Cross-decrees and cross-claims in mortgage-suits.
21. Simultaneous execution.
22. Notice to show cause against execution in certain cases.
23. Procedure after issue of notice.
Process for Execution
24. Process for execution.
25. Endorsement on process.
.
Stay of Execution
RULES
26. When Court may stay execution.
Power to require security from, or impose conditions upon
judgment-debtor.
27. Liability of judgment-debtor discharged.
28. Order of Court which passed decree or of appellate Court
to be binding upon Court applied to.
29. Stay of execution pending suit between decree-holder and
judgment-debtor.
Mode of Execution
30. Decree for payment of money.
31. Decree for specific moveable property.
32. Decree for specific performance, for restitution of
conjugal rights, or for an injunction.
33. Discretion of Court in executing decrees for restitution of
conjugal rights.
34. Decree for execution of document, or endorsement of
negotiable instrument.
35. Decree for immoveable property.
36. Decree for delivery of immoveable property when in
occupancy of tenant.
Arrest and Detention in the Civil Prison
37. Discretionary power to permit judgment-debtor to show
cause against detention in prison.
38. Warrant for arrest to direct judgment-debtor to be brought
up.
39. Subsistence-allowance.
40. Proceedings on appearance of judgment-debtor in
obedience to notice or after arrest.
Attachment of Property
41. Examination of judgment-debtor as to his property.
42. Attachment in case of decree for rent or mesne profits of
other matter, amount of which to be subsequently
determined.
.
RULES
43. Attachment of moveable property other than agricultural
produce, in possession of judgment-debtor.
44. Attachment of agricultural produce.
45. Provisions as to agricultural produce under attachment.
46. Attachment of debt, share and other property not in
possession of judgment-debtor.
47. Attachment of share in moveables.
48. Attachment of salary or allowances of public officer or
servant of railway company or local authority.
49. Attachment of partnership property.
50. Execution of decree against firm.
51. Attachment of negotiable instruments.
52. Attachment of property in custody of Court or public
officer.
53. Attachment of decrees.
54. Attachment of immoveable property.
55. Removal of attachment after satisfaction of decree.
56. Order for payment of coin or currency notes to party
entitled under decree.
57. Determination of attachment.
Investigation of Claims and Objections
58. Investigation of claims to, and objections to attachment
of, attached property.
Postponement of sale.
59. Evidence to be adduced by claimant.
60. Release of property from attachment.
61. Disallowance of claim to property attached.
62. Continuance of attachment subject to claim of
incumbrancer.
63. [Omitted]
Sale Generally
64. Power to order property attached to be sold and proceeds
to be paid to person entitled.
.
RULES
65. Sales by whom conducted and how made.
66. Proclamation of sales by public auction.
67. Mode of making proclamation.
68. Time of sale.
69. Adjournment of stoppage of sale.
70. Saving of certain sales.
71. Defaulting purchaser answerable for loss on re-sale.
72. Decree-holder not to bid for or buy property without
permission.
Where decree-holder purchases. Amount of decree may
be taken as payment.
73. Restriction on bidding or purchase by officers.
Sale of Moveable Property
74. Sale of agricultural produce.
75. Special provisions relating to growing crops.
76. Negotiable instruments and shares in corporations.
77. Sale by public auction.
78. Irregularity not to vitiate sale, but any person injured may
sue.
79. Delivery of moveable property, debts and shares.
80. Transfer of negotiable instruments and shares.
81. Vesting order in case of other property.
Sale of Immoveable Property
82. What Courts may order sales.
83. Postponement of sale to enable judgment-debtor to raise
amount of decree.
84. Deposit by purchaser and re-sale on default.
85. Time for payment in full of purchase-money.
86. Procedure in default of payment.
87. Notification on re-sale.
.
RULES
88. Bid of co-sharer to have preference.
89. Application to set aside sale on deposit.
90. Application to set aside sale on ground of irregularity or
fraud.
91. Application by purchaser to set aside sale on ground of
judgment-debtor having no saleable interest.
92. Sale when to become absolute or be set aside.
93. Return of purchase-money in certain cases.
94. Certificate to purchaser.
95. Delivery of property in occupancy of judgment-debtor.
96. Delivery of property in occupancy of tenant.
Resistance to Delivery of Possession to Decree-holder or Purchaser
97. Resistance or obstruction to possession of immoveable
property.
98. Resistance or obstruction by judgment-debtor.
99. Resistance or obstruction by bona fide claimant.
100. Dispossession by decree-holder or purchaser.
101. Bona fide claimant to be restored to possession.
102. Rules not applicable to transferee lite pendente.
103. Orders conclusive subject to regular suit.
ORDER XXII
DEATH, MARRIAGE AND INSOLVENCY OF PARTIES
1. No abatement by party's death, if right to sue survives.
2. Procedure where one of several plaintiffs or defendants
dies and right to sue survives.
3. Procedure in case of death of one of several plaintiffs or of
sole plaintiff.
4. Procedure in case of death of one of several defendants or
of sole defendant.
5. Determination of question as to legal representative.
6. No abatement by reason of death after hearing.
.
RULES
7. Suit not abated by marriage of female party.
8. When plaintiff's insolvency bars suit.
Procedure where assignee fails to continue suit or give
security.
9. Effect of abatement or dismissal.
9A. Directly setting aside abatement or dismissal.
10. Procedure in case of assignment before final order in suit.
11. Application of Order to appeals.
12. Application of Order to proceedings.
ORDER XXIII
WITHDRAWAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF SUITS
1. Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim.
2. Limitation law not affected by first suit.
3. Compromise of suit.
4. Proceedings in execution of decrees not affected.
ORDER XXIV
PAYMENT INTO COURT
1. Deposit by defendant of amount in satisfaction of claim.
2. Notice of deposit.
3. Interest on deposit not allowed to plaintiff after notice.
4. Procedure where plaintiff accepts deposit as satisfaction in
part.
Procedure where he accepts it as satisfaction in full.
ORDER XXV
SECURITY FOR COSTS
1. When security for costs may be required from plaintiff.
Residence out of Bangladesh.
2. Effect of failure to furnish security.
ORDER XXVI
COMMISSIONS
Commissions to Examine Witnesses
1. Cases in which Court may issue commission to examine
witness.
.
RULES
2. Order of commission.
3. Where witness resides within Court's jurisdiction.
4. Persons for whose examination commission may issue.
5. Commission or Request to examine witness not within
Bangladesh.
6. Court to examine witness pursuant to commission.
7. Return of commission with depositions of witnesses.
8. When depositions may be read in evidence.
Commissions for Local Investigations
9. Commissions to make local investigations.
10. Procedure of Commissioner. Report and depositions to be
evidence in suit. Commissioner may be examined in
person.
Commissions to examine Accounts
11. Commission to examine or adjust accounts.
12. Court to give Commissioner necessary instructions.
Proceedings and report to be evidence. Court may direct
further inquiry.
Commissions to make Partitions
13. Commission to make partition of immoveable property.
14. Procedure of Commissioner.
General Provisions
15. Expenses of commission to be paid into Court.
16. Powers of Commissioners.
17. Attendance and examination of witnesses before
Commissioner.
18. Parties to appear before Commissioner.
Commissions issued at the instance of Foreign Tribunals
19. Cases in which High Court Division may issue commission
to examine witness.
20. Application for commission.
.
RULES
21. To whom commission may be issued.
22. Issue, execution and return of commissions, and
transmission of evidence to foreign Court.
Exclusion of time taken by Commissioner
23. Exclusion of time taken by Commissioner.
ORDER XXVII
SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF PUBLIC
OFFICERS IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY
1. Suits by or against Government.
2. Persons authorised to act for Government.
3. Paints in suits by or against Government.
4. Agent for Government to receive process.
5. Fixing of day for appearance on behalf of Government.
6. Attendance of person able to answer questions relating to
suit against Government.
7. Extension of time to enable public officer to make
reference to Government.
8. Procedure in suits against public officer.
8A. No security to be required from Government or a public
officer in certain cases.
8B. [Omitted]
ORDER XXVIIA
SUITS INVOLVING ANY SUBSTANTIAL QUESTION AS TO THE
INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION LAW
1. Notice to the Attorney General.
2. Court may add Government as party.
3. Costs when Government added as party.
4. Application of Order to appeals.
ORDER XXVIII
SUITS BY OR AGAINST MILITARY OR NAVAL MEN OR AIRMEN
1. Officers, soldiers, sailors of airmen who cannot obtain
leave may authorise any person to sue or defend for them.
.
RULES
2. Person so authorised may act personally or appoint
pleader.
3. Service on person so authorise, or on his pleader, to be
good service.
ORDER XXIX
SUITS BY OR AGAINST CORPORATIONS
1. Subscription and verification of pleading.
2. Service on corporation.
3. Power to require personal attendance of officer of
corporation.
ORDER XXX
SUITS BY OR AGAINST FIRMS AND PERSONS CARRYING ON BUSINESS IN
NAMES OTHER THAN THEIR OWN
1. Suing of partners in name of firm.
2. Disclosure of partners' names.
3. Service.
4. Right of suit on death of partner.
5. Notice in what capacity served.
6. Appearance of partners.
7. No appearance except by partners.
8. Appearance under protest.
9. Suits between co-partners.
10. Suit against person carrying on business in name other
than his own.
ORDER XXXI
SUITS BY OR AGAINST TRUSTEES, EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS
1. Representation of beneficiaries in suits concerning
property vested in trustees, etc.
2. Joinder of trustees, executors and administrators.
.
RULES
3. Husband of married executrix not to join.
ORDER XXXII
SUITS BY OR AGAINST MINORS AND PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND
1. Minor to sue by next friend.
2. Where suit is instituted without next friend, plaint to be
taken off the file.
3. Guardian for the suit to be appointed by court for minor
defendant.
4. Who may act as next friend or be appointed guardian for
the suit.
5. Representation of minor by next friend or guardian for
the suit.
6. Receipt by next friend or guardian for the suit of
property under decree for minor.
7. Agreement or compromise by next friend or guardian for
the suit.
8. Retirement of next friend.
9. Removal of next friend.
10. Stay of proceedings on removal, etc., of next friend.
11. Retirement, removal of death of guardian for the suit.
12. Course to be followed by minor plaintiff or applicant on
attaining majority.
13. Where minor co-plaintiff attaining majority desires to
repudiate suit.
14. Unreasonable or improper suit.
15. Application of rules to persons of unsound mind.
16. Saving for Princes and Chiefs.
ORDER XXXIII
SUITS BY PAUPERS
1. Suits may be instituted in forma pauperis.
2. Contents of application.
3. Presentation of application.
.
RULES
4. Examination of applicant.
If presented by agent, Court may order applicant to be
examined by commission.
5. Rejection of application.
6. Notice of day for receiving evidence of applicant's
pauperism.
7. Procedure at hearing.
8. Procedure if application admitted.
9. Dispaupering.
10. Costs where pauper succeeds.
11. Procedure where pauper fails.
11A. Procedure where pauper suit abates.
12. Government may apply for payment of court-fees.
13. Government to be deemed a party.
14. Recovery of amount of court-fees.
15. Refusal to allow applicant to sue as pauper to bar
subsequent application of like nature.
16. Costs.
ORDER XXXIV
SUITS RELATING TO MORTGAGES OF IMMOVEABLE
PROPERTY
1. Parties to suits for foreclosure, sale and redemption.
2. Preliminary decree in foreclosure suit.
3. Final decree in foreclosure suit.
4. Preliminary decree in suit for sale.
Power to decree sale in foreclosure suit.
5. Final decree in suit for sale.
6. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for sale.
7. Preliminary decree in redemption suit.
8. Final decree in redemption suit.
8A. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for
redemption.
.
RULES
9. Decree where nothing is found due or where mortgagee
has been overpaid.
10. Costs of mortgagee subsequent to decree.
11. Payment of interest.
12. Sale of property subject to prior mortgage.
13. Application of proceeds.
14. Suit for sale necessary for bringing mortgaged property
to sale.
15. Mortgages by the deposit of title-deeds and charges.
ORDER XXXV
INTERPLEADER
1. Plaint in interpleader-suits.
2. Payment of thing claimed into Court.
3. Procedure where defendant is suing plaintiff.
4. Procedure at first hearing.
5. Agents and tenants may not institute interpleader-suits.
6. Charge for plaintiff's costs.
ORDER XXXVI
SPECIAL CASE
1. Power to state case for Court's opinion.
2. Where value of subject-matter must be stated.
3. Agreement to be filed and registered as suit.
4. Parties to be subject to Court's jurisdiction.
5. Hearing and disposal of case.
ORDER XXXVII
SUMMARY PROCEDURE ON NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
1. Application of Order.
2. Institution of summary suits upon bills of exchange, etc.
3. Defendant showing defence on merits to have leave to
appear.
.
RULES
4. Power to set aside decree.
5. Power to order bill, etc., to be deposited with officer of
Court.
6. Recovery of cost of noting non-acceptance of
dishonoured bill or note.
7. Procedure in suits.
ORDER XXXVIII
ARREST AND ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT
Arrest before Judgment
1. Where defendant may called upon to furnish security for
appearance.
2. Security.
3. Procedure on application by surety to be discharged.
4. Procedure where defendant fails to furnish security or
find fresh security.
Attachment before Judgment
5. Where defendant may be called upon to furnish security
for production of property.
6. Attachment where cause not shown or security not
furnished.
7. Mode of making attachment.
8. Investigation of claim to property attached before
judgment.
9. Removal of attachment when security furnished or suit
dismissed.
10. Attachment before judgment not to affect rights of
strangers nor bar decree-holder from applying for sale.
11. Property attached before judgment not to be re-attached
in execution of decree.
12. Agricultural produce not attachable before judgment.
13. Small Cause Court not to attach immoveable property.
ORDER XXXIX
TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS
Temporary Injunctions
1. Cases in which temporary injunction may be granted.
.
RULES
2. Injunction to restrain repetition or continuance of
breach.
3. Before granting injunction Court to direct notice to
opposite party.
3A. Mode of service of unserved returned notices.
4. Order for injunction may be discharged, varied or set
aside.
5. Injunction to corporation binding on its officers.
5A. No order of ad interim or temporary injunction without
hearing the opposite party.
Interlocutory Orders
6. Power to order interim sale.
7. Detention, preservation, inspection, etc., of subjectmatter of suit.
8. Application for such orders to be after notice.
9. When party may be put in immediate possession of land
the subject-matter of suit.
10. Deposit of money, etc., in Court.
ORDER XL
APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVERS
1. Appointment of receivers.
2. Remuneration.
3. Duties.
4. Enforcement of receiver's duties.
5. When Collector may be appointed receiver.
ORDER XLI
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES
1. Form of appeal.
What to accompany memorandum.
Contents of memorandum.
2. Grounds which may be taken in appeal.
3. Rejection or amendment of memorandum.
.
RULES
4. One of several plaintiffs or defendants may obtain
reversal of whole decree where it proceeds on ground
common to all.
Stay of Proceeding and of Execution
5. Stay by appellate Court.
Stay by Court which passed the decree.
6. Security in case of order for execution of decree appealed
from.
7. [Repealed]
8. Exercise of powers in appeal from order made in
execution of decree.
Procedure on Admission of Appeal
9. Registry of memorandum of appeal.
Register of Appeals.
10. Appellate Court may require appellant to furnish security
for costs.
Where appellant resides out of Bangladesh.
11. Power to dismiss appeal without sending notice to Lower
Court.
12. Day for hearing appeal.
12A. Adjournment in appeal.
13. Appellate Court to give notice to Court whose decree
appealed from.
Transmission of papers to Appellate Court.
Copies of exhibits in Court whose decree appealed from.
14. Publication and service of notice of day for hearing
appeal.
Appellate Court may itself cause notice to be served.
15. Contents of notice.
15A. Prosecution of an appeal.
Procedure on Hearing
16. Right to begin.
17. Dismissal of appeal for appellant's default.
Hearing appeal ex parte.
.
RULES
18. Dismissal of appeal where notice not served in
consequence of appellant's failure to deposit costs.
19. Re-admission of appeal dismissed for default.
19A. Direct re-admission of appeal.
20. Power to adjourn hearing and direct persons appearing
interest to be made respondents.
21. Re-hearing on application of respondent against whom
ex parte decree made.
21A. Direct re-hearing of appeal.
22. Upon hearing, respondent may object to decree as if he
had preferred separate appeal.
Form of objection and provisions applicable thereto.
23. Remand of case by Appellate Court.
24. Where evidence on record sufficient, Appellate Court
may determine case finally.
25. Where Appellate Court may frame issues and refer them
for trial of Court whose decree appealed from.
26. Findings and evidence to be put on record.
Objections to finding.
Determination of appeal.
27. Production of additional evidence in Appellate Court.
28. Mode of taking additional evidence.
29. Points to be defined and recorded.
Judgment in Appeal
30. Judgment when and where pronounced.
31. Contents, date and signature of judgment.
32. What judgment may direct.
33. Power of Court of Appeal.
34. Dissent to be recorded.
Decree in Appeal
35. Date and contents of decree.
Judge dissenting from judgment need not sign decree.
36. Copies of judgment and decree to be furnished to parties.
37. Certified copy of decree to be sent to Court whose decree
appealed from.
ORDER XLII
APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES
RULES
1. Procedure.
ORDER XLIII
APPEALS FROM ORDERS
1. Appeals from orders.
2. Procedure.
ORDER XLIV
PAUPER APPEALS
1. Who may appeal as pauper.
Procedure on application for admission of appeal.
2. Inquiry into pauperism.
ORDER XLV
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE DIVISION
1. "Decree" defined.
2. Application to Court whose decree complained of.
3. Certificate as to value or fitness.
4. Consolidation of suits.
5. Remission of dispute to Court of first instance.
6. Effect of refusal of certificate.
7. Security and deposit required on grant of certificate.
8. Admission of appeal and procedure thereon.
9. Revocation of acceptance of security.
9A. Power to dispense with notices in case of deceased
parties.
10. Power to order further security or payment.
11. Effect of failure to comply with order.
12. Refund of balance deposit.
13. Powers of Court pending appeal.
.
RULES
14. Increase of security found inadequate.
15. Procedure to enforce orders of the Appellate Division.
16. Appeal from order relating to execution.
17. [Omitted]
ORDER XLVI
REFERENCE
1. Reference of question to High Court Division.
2. Court may pass decree contingent upon decision of High
Court Division.
3. Judgment of High Court Division to be transmitted, and
case disposed of accordingly.
4. Costs of reference to High Court Division.
5. Power to alter, etc., decree of Court making reference.
6. Power to refer to High Court Division questions as to
Jurisdiction is small causes.
7. Power to District Court to submit for revision
proceedings had under mistake as to jurisdiction in small
causes.
ORDER XLVII
REVIEW
1. Application for review of judgment.
2. To whom applications for review may be made.
3. Form of applications for review.
4. Application where rejected.
Application where granted.
5. Application for review in Court consisting of two or
more Judges.
6. Application where rejected.
7. Order of rejection not appealable.
Objections to order granting application.
8. Registry of application granted, and order for re-hearing.
9. Bar of certain applications.
.
ORDER XLVIII
MISCELLANEOUS
RULES
1. Process to be served at expense of party issuing.
Costs of service.
2. Orders and notices how served.
3. Use of forms in appendices.
ORDER XLIX
HIGH COURT DIVISION
1. Who may serve processes of High Court Division.
2. Saving in respect of High Court Division.
3. Application of rules.
ORDER L
SMALL CAUSE COURTS
1. Small Cause Courts.
ORDER LI. [Omitted]
APPENDICES TO THE FIRST SCHEDULE
FORMS
A. PLEADINGS.
1. Titles of Suits.
2. Description of Parties in particular cases.
3. Plaints.
4. Written Statement.
B. PROCESS.
C. DISCOVERY, INSPECTION AND ADMISSION.
D. DECREES.
E. EXECUTION.
F. SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS.
G. APPEAL, REFERENCE AND REVIEW.
H. MISCELLANEOUS.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 121)
ORDER I
PARTIES TO SUITS
Who may be
joined as
plaintiffs
1. All persons may be joined in one suit as plaintiffs in
whom any right to relief in respect of or arising out of the same
act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is alleged to
exist, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative, where, if
such persons brought separate suits, any common question of
law or fact would arise.
Power of Court
to order separate
trials
2. Where it appears to the Court that any joinder of
plaintiffs may embarrass or delay the trial of the suit, the Court
may put the plaintiffs to their election or order separate trials or
make such other order as may be expedient.
Who may be
joined as
defendants
3. All persons may be joined as defendants against whom
any right to relief in respect of or arising out of the same act or
transaction or series of acts or transactions is alleged to exist,
whether jointly, severally or in the alternative, where, if separate
suits were brought against such persons, any common question
of law or fact would arise.
Court may give
judgment for or
against one or
more of joint
parties
4. Judgment may be given without any amendment
(a) for such one or more of the plaintiffs as may be
found to be entitled to relief, for such relief as he or
they may be entitled to;
(b) against such one or more of the defendants as may
be found to be liable, according to their respective
liabilities.
Defendant need
not be interested
in all the relief
claimed
5. It shall not be necessary that every defendant shall be
interested as to all the relief claimed in any suit against him.
Joinder of
parties liable on
same contract
6. The plaintiff may, at his option, join as parties to the
same suit all or any of the persons severally, or jointly and
severally, liable on any one contract, including parties to bills of
exchange, hundis and promissory notes.
.
7. Where the plaintiff is in doubt as to the person from
whom he is entitled to obtain redress, he may join two or more
defendants in order that the question as to which of the
defendants is liable, and to what extent, may be determined as
between all parties.
When plaintiff
in doubt from
whom redress is
to be sought
8. (1) Where there are numerous persons having the same
interest in one suit, one or more of such persons may, with the
permission of the Court, sue or be sued, or may defend, in such
suit, on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so interested.
But the Court shall in such case give, at the plaintiff's expense,
notice of the institution of the suit to all such persons either by
personal service or, where from the number of persons or any
other cause such service is not reasonably practicable, by public
advertisement, as the Court in each case may direct.
One person may
sue or defend on
behalf of all in
same interest
(2) Any person on whose behalf or for whose benefit a suit
is instituted or defended under sub-rule (1) may apply to the
Court to be made a party to such suit.
9. No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or
nonjoinder of parties, and the Court may in every suit deal with
the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and
interests of the parties actually before it.
Misjoinder and
nonjoinder
10. (1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the
wrong person as plaintiff or where it is doubtful whether it has
been instituted in the name of the right plaintiff, the Court may
at any stage of the suit, if satisfied that the suit has been
instituted through a bona fide mistake, and that it is necessary
for the determination of the real matter in dispute so to do, order
any other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon
such terms as the Court thinks just.
Suit in name of
wrong plaintiff
(2) The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either
upon or without the application of either party, and on such
terms as may appear to the Court to be just, order that the name
of any party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or
defendant, be struck out, and that the name of any person who
ought to have been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or
whose presence before the Court may be necessary in order to
enable the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon
and settle all the questions involved in the suit, be added.
Court may strike
out or add
parties
.
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a
next friend or as the next friend of a plaintiff under any
disability without his consent.
Where
defendant
added, plaint to
be amended
(4) Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall, unless the
Court otherwise directs, be amended in such manner as may be
necessary, and amended copies of the summons and of the plaint
shall be served on the new defendant and, if the Court thinks fit,
on the original defendant.
(5) Subject to the provisions of the 1
[Limitation Act,
1908], section 22, the proceedings as against any person added
as defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the service
of the summons.
Conduct of suit 11. The Court may give the conduct of the suit to such
person as it deems proper.
Appearance of
one of several
plaintiffs or
defendants for
others
12. (1) Where there are more plaintiffs than one, any one
or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to
appear, plead or act for such other in any proceedings; and in
like manner, where there are more defendants than one, any one
or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to
appear, plead or act for such other in any proceeding.
(2) The authority shall be in writing signed by the party
giving it and shall be filed in Court.
Objections as to
nonjoinder or
misjoinder
13. All objections on the ground of nonjoinder or
misjoinder of parties shall be taken at the earliest possible
opportunity and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or
before such settlement, unless the ground of objection has
subsequently arisen, and any such objection not so taken shall
be deemed to have been waived.
ORDER II
FRAME OF SUIT
Frame of suit 1. Every suit shall as far as practicable be framed so as to
afford ground for final decision upon the subjects in dispute and
to prevent further litigation concerning them.
.

1 The words, comma and figure "Limitation Act, 1908" were substituted, for the words,
comma and figure "Indian Limitation Act, 1877" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the
Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
2. (1) Every suit shall include the whole of the claim
which the plaintiff is entitled to make in respect of the cause of
action; but a plaintiff may relinquish any portion of his claim in
order to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of any Court.
Suit to include
the whole claim
(2) Where a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or
intentionally relinquishes, any portion of his claim, he shall not
afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or
relinquished.
Relinquishment
of part of claim
(3) A person entitled to more than one relief in respect of
the same cause of action may sue for all or any of such reliefs;
but if he omits, except with the leave of the Court, to sue for all
such reliefs, he shall not afterwards sue for any relief so
omitted.
Omission to sue
for one of
several reliefs
Explanation.For the purposes of this rule an obligation
and a collateral security for its performance and successive
claims arising under the same obligation shall be deemed
respectively to constitute but one cause of action.
Illustration
A lets a house to B at yearly rent of Taka 1,200. The rent for the
whole of the years 1905, 1906 and 1907 is due and unpaid. A sues B in
1908 only for the rent due for 1906. A shall not afterwards sue B for
the rent due for 1905 or 1907.
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, a plaintiff may unite in
the same suit several causes of action against the same
defendant, or the same defendants jointly; and any plaintiff
having causes of action in which they are jointly interested
against the same defendant or the same defendants jointly may
unite such causes of action in the same suit.
Joinder of causes
of action
(2) Where causes of action are united, the jurisdiction of
the Court as regards the suit shall depend on the amount or
value of the aggregate subject-matters at the date of instituting
the suit.
4. No cause of action shall, unless with the leave of the
Court, be joined with a suit for the recovery of immoveable
property, except
Only certain
claims to be
joined for
recovery of
immoveable
property (a) claims for mesne profits or arrears of rent in respect of
the property claimed or any part thereof;
.
(b) claims for damages for breach of any contract under
which the property or any part thereof is held; and
(c) claims in which the relief sought is based on the same
cause of action:
Provided that nothing in this rule shall be deemed to
prevent any party in a suit for foreclosure or redemption from
asking to be put into possession of the mortgaged property.
Claims by or
against executor,
administrator or
heir
5. No claim by or against an executor, administrator or
heir, as such, shall be joined with claims by or against him
personally, unless the last mentioned claims are alleged to arise
with reference to the estate in respect of which the plaintiff or
defendant sues or is sued as executor, administrator or heir, or
are such as he was entitled to, or liable for, jointly with the
deceased person whom he represents.
Power of Court
to order separate
trials
6. Where it appears to the Court that any causes of action
joined in one suit cannot be conveniently tried or disposed of
together, the Court may order separate trials or make such other
order as may be expedient.
Objections as to
misjoinder
7. All objections on the ground of misjoinder of causes of
action shall be taken at the earliest possible opportunity and, in
all cases where issues are settled, at or before such settlement,
unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen, and any
such objection not so taken shall be deemed to have been
waived.
ORDER III
RECOGNIZED AGENTS AND PLEADERS
Appearances,
etc., may be in
person, by
recognized agent
or by pleader
1. Any appearance, application or act in or to any Court,
required or authorized by law to be made or done by a party in
such Court, may, except where otherwise expressly provided by
any law for the time being in force, be made or done by the
party in person, or by his recognized agent, or by a pleader
appearing, applying or acting, as the case may be, on his behalf:
Provided that any such appearance shall, if the Court so
directs, be made by the party in person.
.
2. The recognized agents of parties by whom such
appearances, applications and acts may be made or done are
Recognized
agents
(a) persons holding powers-of-attorney, authorizing them to
make and do such appearances, applications and acts on
behalf of such parties;
(b) persons carrying on trade or business for and in the
names of parties not resident within the local limits of
the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the
appearance, application or act is made or done, in
matters connected with such trade or business only,
where no other agent is expressly authorized to make
and do such appearances, applications and acts.
3. (1) Processes served on the recognized agent of a party
shall be as effectual as if the same had been served on the party
in person, unless the Court otherwise directs.
Service of
process on
recognized agent
(2) The provisions for the service of process on a party to
a suit shall apply to the service of process on his recognized
agent.
4. (1) No pleader shall act for any person in any Court,
unless he has been appointed for the purpose by such person by
a document in writing signed by such person or by his
recognized agent or by some other person duly authorized by or
under a power-of-attorney to make such appointment.
Appointment of
pleader
(2) Every such appointment shall be filed in Court and
shall be deemed to be in force until determined with the leave
of the Court by a writing signed by the client or the pleader, as
the case may be, and filed in Court, or until the client or the
pleader dies, or until all proceedings in the suit are ended so far
as regards the client.
(3) For the purposes of sub-rule (2) an application for
review of judgment, an application under section 144 or section
152 of this Code, any appeal from any decree or order in the
suit and any application or act for the purpose of obtaining
copies of documents or return of documents produced or filed
in the suit or of obtaining refund of monies paid into the Court
in connection with the suit shall be deemed to be proceedings in
the suit.
.
(4) The High Court Division may, by general order, direct
that, where the person by whom a pleader is appointed is unable
to write his name, his mark upon the document appointing the
pleader shall be attested by such person and in such manner as
may be specified by the order.
(5) No pleader who has been engaged for the purpose of
pleading only shall plead on behalf of any party, unless he has
filed in Court a memorandum of appearance signed by himself
and stating-
(a) the names of the parties to the suit,
(b) the name of the party for whom he appears, and
(c) the name of the person by whom he is authorised to
appear:
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall apply to any
pleader engaged to plead on behalf of any party by any other
pleader who has been duly appointed to act in Court on behalf
of such party.
Service of
process on
pleader
5. Any process served on the pleader of any party or left at
the office or ordinary residence of such pleader, and whether
the same is for the personal appearance of the party or not, shall
be presumed to be duly communicated and made known to the
party whom the pleader represents, and, unless the Court
otherwise directs, shall be as effectual for all purposes as if the
same had been given to or served on the party in person.
Agent to accept
service
6. (1) Besides the recognized agents described in rule 2
any person residing within the jurisdiction of the Court may be
appointed an agent to accept service of process.
Appointment to
be in writing and
to be filed in
Court
(2) Such appointment may be special or general and shall
be made by an instrument in writing signed by the principal,
and such instrument or, if the appointment is general, a certified
copy thereof shall be filed in Court.
.
ORDER IV
INSTITUTION OF SUITS
1.1
[(1) Every suit shall be instituted by presenting a plaint
to the Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf a plaint
together with as many true copies of the plaint as there are
defendants for service of summons upon such defendants.
Suit to be
commenced by
plaint
(1a) The Court fees chargeable for service of summons
shall be paid in the case of suits when the plaint is filed, and in
the case of all other proceedings when process is applied for.
(1b) A plaintiff shall file, along with the plaint, for each
defendant a copy of the summons along with a pre-paid
registered acknowledgment due cover with complete and
correct address of the defendant written on it.]
(2) Every plaint shall comply with the rules contained in
Orders VI and VII, so far as they are applicable.
2. The Court shall cause the particulars of every suit to be
entered in a book to be kept for the purpose and called the
register of civil suits. Such entries shall be numbered in every
year according to the order in which the plaints are admitted.
Register of suits
ORDER V
ISSUE AND SERVICE OF SUMMONS
Issue of Summons
1.
2
[(1) When a suit has been duly instituted a summons
shall be issued by the officer of the Court appointed in this
behalf to the defendant within five working days from the date
of filing the suit to appear and answer the claim on a day to be
therein specified:
Summons
Provided that if the officer of the Court fails to issue the
summons within the said period of time, he shall be liable for
misconduct:
Provided further that no such summons shall be issued
when the defendant has appeared at the presentation of the
plaint and admitted the plaintiff's claim.]
 (2) A defendant to whom a summons has been issued under
sub-rule (1) may appear
(a) in person, or
(b) by a pleader duly instructed and able to answer all
material questions relating to the suit, or
(c) by a pleader accompanied by some person able to answer
all such questions.

1
Sub-rules (1), (1a) and (1b) were substituted, for sub-rule (1) by section 5 of the Code
of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
2
Sub-rule (1) was substituted by section 5(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
 (3) Every such summons shall be signed by the Judge or
such officer as he appoints, and shall be sealed with the seal of
the Court.
Copy or
statement
annexed to
summons
2. Every summons shall be accompanied by a copy of the
plaint or, if so permitted, by a concise statement.
Court may order
defendant or
plaintiff to
appear in person
3. (1) Where the Court sees reason to require the personal
appearance of the defendant, the summons shall order him to
appear in person in Court on the day therein specified.
(2) Where the Court sees reason to require the personal
appearance of the plaintiff on the same day, it shall make an
order for such appearance.
No party to be
ordered to
appear in person
unless resident
within certain
limits
4. No party shall be ordered to appear in person unless he
resides
(a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary original
jurisdiction, or
(b) without such limits but at a place less than fifty or
(where there is railway or steamer communication or
other established public conveyance for five-sixths of
the distance between the place where he resides and the
place where the Court is situate) less than two hundred
miles distance from the court-house.
Summons to be
either to settle
issues or for
final disposal
5. The Court shall determine, at the time of issuing the
summons, whether it shall be for the settlement of issues only,
or for the final disposal of the suit; and the summons shall
contain a direction accordingly:
Provided that, in every suit heard by a Court of Small
Causes, the summons shall be for the final disposal of the suit.
Fixing day for
appearance of
defendant
6. The day for the appearance of the defendant shall be
fixed with reference to the current business of the Court, the
place of residence of the defendant and the time necessary for
the service of the summons; and the day shall be so fixed as to
allow the defendant sufficient time to enable him to appear and
answer on such day.
Summons to
order defendant
to produce
documents relied
on by him
7. The summons to appear and answer shall order the
defendant to produce all documents in his possession or power
upon which he intends to rely in support of his case.
.
8. Where the summons is for the final disposal of the suit,
it shall also direct the defendant to produce, on the day fixed for
his appearance, all witnesses upon whose evidence he intends to
rely in support of his case.
On issue of
summons for
final disposal,
defendant to be
directed to
produce his
witnesses
Service of Summons
1
[9. (1) Where the defendant resides within the jurisdiction of
the Court in which the suit is instituted, or has an agent resident
within that jurisdiction who is empowered to accept the service of
the summons, the summons shall, unless the Court otherwise
directs, be delivered or sent either to the proper officer to be served
by him or one of his subordinates or through courier service
enlisted by the District Judge under sub-rule (4).
Delivery or
transmission of
summons for
service
(2) The proper officer may be an officer of a Court other
than that in which the suit is instituted, and where he is such an
officer, the summons may be sent to him by post or in such
manner as the Court may direct.
 (3) The Court may, in addition to the service of summons
under sub-rule (1), on the application of the plaintiff for the
issue of a summons for the appearance of the defendant, also
direct the summons to be served by means of 2
[Short Message
Service, Voice Calls, Instant Messaging Services,] fax massage
or electronic mail service by the plaintiff at his own cost 3
[:
 Provided that the proof of such service shall be kept in
record.]
(4) The District Judge shall prepare a list of courier
services (to be updated from time to time) for the purposes of
sub-rule (1), and shall inform all the Civil Courts under his
administrative jurisdiction about the list.

1 Rules 9 and 9A were substituted by section 5(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
2 The words and commas “Short Message Service, Voice Calls, Instant Messaging
Services,” were substituted for the words “transmission of documents through” by
section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance
No. XVIII of 2025).
3
 The colon “:” was substituted for the full stop “.” and thereafter proviso was inserted
by section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025
(Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
(5) When a summons is sent to the proper officer or the
courier service, he or it shall serve the summons within thirty
days from the date of receipt of summons and shall inform the
Court in this regard:
Provided that, if the proper officer or the courier service
fails to serve the summons within the said period of time, that
officer shall be liable for misconduct and in the case of courier
service, the District Judge shall exclude it from the list prepared
under sub-rule (4).
Summons given
to the plaintiff
for service
9A. (1) The Court may, in addition to the service of
summons under rule 9, on the application of the plaintiff for the
issue of summons for the appearance of the defendant, permit
such plaintiff to effect service of such summons on such
defendant and shall, in such a case, deliver the summons to
such plaintiff for service.
(2) The service of such summons shall be effected by or
on behalf of such plaintiff by delivering or tendering to the
defendant personally a copy thereof signed by the Judge or such
officer of the Court-as he may appoint in this behalf and sealed
with the seal of the Court.
(3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 shall apply to a
summons personally served under this rule as if the person
effecting the service were a serving officer and the plaintiff
shall submit a report to the Court accompanied by an affidavit.
(4) If such summons, when tendered, is refused or if the
person served refuses to sign an acknowledgment of service or
for any reason such summons cannot be served personally, the
Court shall, on the application of the plaintiff, re-issue such
summons to be served by the Court in the same manner as a
summons to a defendant.]
10. Service of the summons shall be made by delivering or
tendering a copy thereof signed by the Judge or such officer as
he appoints in this behalf, and sealed with the seal of the Court.
Mode of service
11. Save as otherwise prescribed, where there are more
defendants than one, service of the summons shall be made on
each defendant.
Service on
several
defendants
12. Wherever it is practicable, service shall be made on
the defendant in person, unless he has an agent empowered to
accept service, in which case service on such agent shall be
sufficient.
Service to be on
defendant in
person when
practicable or on
his agent
13. (1) In a suit relating to any business or work against a
person who does not reside within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the Court from which the summons is issued,
service on any manager or agent, who, at the time of service,
personally carries on such business or work for such person
within such limits, shall be deemed good service.
 (2) For the purpose of this rule the master of a ship
shall be deemed to be the agent of the owner or character.
Service on agent
by whom
defendant carries
on business
.
Service on
agent in
charge in suits
for
immoveable
property
14. Where in a suit to obtain relief respecting, or
compensation for wrong to, immoveable property, service
cannot be made on the defendant in person, and the defendant
has no agent empowered to accept the service, it may be made
on any agent of the defendant in charge of the property.
Where service
may be on
1
[adult
member] of
defendant's
family
15. Where in any suit the defendant cannot be found and
has no agent empowered to accept service of the summons on
his behalf, service may be made on any 2
[adult member] of the
family of the defendant who is residing with him.
Explanation.A servant is not a member of the family within
the meaning of this rule.
Person served
to sign
acknowledgm
ent
16. Where the serving officer delivers or tenders a copy of the
summons to the defendant personally, or to an agent or other person
on his behalf, he shall require the signature of the person to whom the
copy is so delivered or tendered to an acknowledgment of service
endorsed on the original summons.
Procedure
when
defendant
refuses to
accept
service, or
cannot be
found
17. Where the defendant or his agent or such other person as
aforesaid refuses to sign the acknowledgment, or where the serving
officer, after using all due and reasonable diligence, cannot find the
defendant, and there is no agent empowered to accept service of the
summons on his behalf, nor any other person on whom service can be
made, the serving officer shall affix a copy of the summons on the
outer door or some other conspicuous part of the house in which the
defendant ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain, and shall then return the original to the Court from
which it was issued, with a report endorsed thereon or annexed
thereto stating that he has so affixed the copy, the circumstances
under which he did so, and the name and address of the person (if
any) by whom the house was identified and in whose presence the
copy was affixed.
.

1 The words “adult member” were substituted for the words “male member” in the maginal
heading by section 5(c)(i) of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No.
XXXVI of 2012).
2 The words “adult member” were substituted for the words “adult male member” by section
5(c)(ii) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
18. The serving officer shall, in all cases in which the
summons has been served under rule 16, endorse or annex, or cause to
be endorsed or annexed, on or to the original summons, a return stating
the time when and the manner in which the summons were served, and
the name and address of the person (if any) identifying the person
served and witnessing the delivery or tender of the summons.
Endorsement
of time and
manner of
service
19. Where a summons is returned under rule 17, the Court
shall, if the return under that rule has not been verified by the affidavit
of the serving officer, and may, if it has been so verified, examine the
serving officer on oath, or cause him to be so examined by another
Court, touching his proceedings, and may make such further inquiry in
the matter as it thinks fit; and shall either declare that the summons has
been duly served or order such service as it thinks fit.
Examination
of serving
officer
1
[19A. A declaration made and subscribed by serving officer
shall be received as evidence of the facts as to the service or attempted
service of summons.
Declaration
of serving
officer
19B. (1) The Court shall, in addition to, and simultaneously with,
the issue of summons for service in the manner provided in rules 9 to
19 (both inclusive), also direct the summons to be served by registered
post with acknowledgment due addressed to the defendant or his agent
empowered to accept the service at the place where the defendant or
his agent actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or
personally works for gain:
Simultaneous
issue of
summons for
service by
post in
addition to
personal
service
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall require the Court to
issue a summons for service by registered post where, in the
circumstances of the case, the Court considers it unnecessary.
(2) When an acknowledgment is purporting to be signed by
the defendant or his agent is received by the Court or the postal article
containing the summons is received back by the Court with an
endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee to the
effect that the defendant or his agent had refused to take delivery of the
postal article containing the summons when tendered to him, the Court
issuing the summons shall declare that the summons had been duly
served on the defendant:
.
Provided that where the summons was properly addressed, prepaid and duly sent by registered post with acknowledgment due, the
declaration referred to in this sub-rule may be made not-withstanding
the fact that the acknowledgment having been lost or mislaid or for any
other reason, has not been received by the court within thirty days from
the date of issue of the summons.]

1 Rules 19A and 19B were inserted by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Substituted
service
20. (1) Where the Court is satisfied that there is reason to
believe that the defendant is keeping out of the way for the purpose
of avoiding service, or that for any other reason the summons cannot
be served in the ordinary way, the Court shall order the summons to
be served by affixing a copy thereof in some conspicuous place in the
Court-house, and also upon some conspicuous part of the house (if
any) in which the defendant is known to have last resided or carried
on business or personally worked for gain, or in such other manner as
the Court thinks fit.
1
[(1A) Where the Court under sub-rule (1) pass an order to
service the summons by an advertisement in a newspaper, the
newspaper shall be a daily newspaper which has circulation in the
locality in which the defendant is last known to have actually and
voluntarily resided, carried on business or personally worked for
gain.]
Effect of
substituted
service
(2) Service substituted by order of the Court shall be as
effectual as if it had been made on the defendant personally.
Where service
substituted,
time for
appearance to
be fixed
(3) Where service is substituted by order of the Court,
the Court shall fix such time for the appearance of the
defendant as the case may require.
Service of
summons
where
defendant
resides within
jurisdiction of
another Court
21. A summons may be sent by the Court by which it is
issued 2
[* * *] either by one of its officers or by post 3
[or
through courier service as mentioned in sub-rule (4) of rule 9]
to any Court (not being the High Court Division) having
jurisdiction in the place where the defendant resides.
22. [Omitted by the Adaptation of Central Acts and
Ordinances Order, 1949.]
Duty of Court
to which
summons is
sent
23. The Court to which a summons is sent under rule 21 shall,
upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been issued by such Court
and shall then returns the summons to the Court of issue, together
with the record (if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto.
.

1
Sub-rule (1A) was inserted by section 5(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
2 The commas and words ", whether within or without the Province," were omitted by section 3
and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII
of 1973).
3 The words, brackets and figurs “or through courier service as mentioned in sub-rule (4) of rule
9” were inserted after the words “by post” by section 5(e) of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
24. Where defendant is confined in a prison, the summons
shall be delivered or sent by post 1
[or through courier service as
mentioned in sub-rule (4) of rule 9] or otherwise to the officer in
charge of the prison for service on the defendant.
Service on
defendant in
prison
2
[25. (1) Where the defendant resides out of Bangladesh
and has no agent in Bangladesh empowered to accept service,
the summons shall be addressed to the defendant at the place
where he is residing and sent to him by post or through courier
service as mentioned in sub-rule (4) of rule 9, if there is postal
communication between such place and the place where the
Court is situate.
(2) The Court may, in addition to the service of summons
under sub-rule (1), on the application of the plaintiff for the
issue of a summons for the appearance of the defendant, also
direct the summons to be served by means of transmission of
documents through fax massage or electronic mail service by
the plaintiff at his own cost.]
Service where
defendant
resides out of
Bangladesh
and has no
agent
26. Where
(a) in the exercise of any foreign or extra 3
[territorial]
jurisdiction vested in the Government, 4
[* * *] a Court
has been established or continued, with power to serve a
summons issued by a Court under this Code in any
foreign territory in which the defendant resides, or
Service in
foreign
territory
through
Political Agent
or Court

1 The words, brackets and figures “or through courier service as mentioned in sub-rule (4) of rule
9” were inserted after the words “by post” by section 5(f) of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
2 Rule 25 was substituted by section 5(g) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012
(Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
3 The word "territorial" was substituted, for the word "provincial" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule
of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
4 The letter, words and comma "a Political Agent has been appointed, or" were omitted by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act
No. VIII of 1973).
(b) the Government has, by notification in the official Gazette,
declared, in respect of any Court situate in any such territory and not
established or continued in the exercise of any such jurisdiction as
aforesaid, that service by such Court of any summons issued under
this Code by a Court of 1
[Bangladesh] shall be deemed to be valid
service,
the summons may be sent to such 2
[* * *] Court, by post or
otherwise, for the purpose of being served upon the
defendant;
and, if the 3
[* * *] Court returns the summons with an
endorsement signed by 4
[* * *] the Judge or other officer of
the Court that the summons has been served on the defendant
in manner hereinbefore directed, such endorsement shall be
deemed to be evidence of service.
26A. [Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012), section
5(h).]
Service on civil
public officer
or on servant of
railway
company or
local authority
27. Where the defendant is a public officer (not
belonging to the armed forces of Bangladesh, or is the servant
of 5
[the railway] or local authority, the Court may, if it appears
to it that the summons may be most conveniently so served,
send it for service on the defendant to the head of the office in
which he is employed, together with a copy to be retained by
the defendant.

1 The word "Bangladesh" was substituted, for the words "the Province" by section 3 and 2nd
Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of
1973).
2 The words "Political Agent or" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh
Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
3 The words "Political Agent or" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh
Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
4 The words "such Political Agent or by" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the
Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
5 The words "the Railway" were substituted, for the letter and words "a railway company" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act
No. VIII of 1973).
28. Where the defendant is a soldier, sailor or airman, the Court
shall send the summons for service to his commanding officer together
with a copy to be retained by the defendant.
Service on
soldiers, sailors
or airmen
29. (1) Where a summons is delivered or sent to any person for
service under rule 24, rule 27 or rule 28, such person shall be bound to
serve it, if possible, and to return it under his signature, with the written
acknowledgment of the defendant, and such signature shall be deemed
to be evidence of service.
Duty of person
to whom
summons is
delivered or sent
for service
(2) Where from any cause service is impossible, the summons
shall be returned to the Court with a full statement of such cause and of
the steps taken to procure service, and such statement shall be deemed
to be evidence of non-service.
30. (1) The Court may, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore
contained, substitute for a summons a letter signed by the Judge or such
officer as he may appoint in this behalf, where the defendant is, in the
opinion of the Court, of a rank entitling him to such mark of
consideration.
Substitution of
letter for
summons
(2) A letter substituted under sub-rule (1) shall contain all the
particulars required to be stated in a summons, and, subject to the
provisions of sub-rule (3), shall be treated in all respects as a summons.
(3) A letter so substituted may be sent to the defendant by post or
by a special messenger selected by the Court, or in any other manner
which the Court thinks fit; and, where the defendant has an agent
empowered to accept service, the letter may be delivered or sent to
such agent.
1
[31. If the Court is satisfied that the summons has been served
by any of the modes as is mentioned in this Order, it shall be deemed
that the summons has been duly served.]
Service of
summons when
completed
ORDER VI
PLEADINGS GENERALLY
1. "Pleading" shall mean plaint or written statement. Pleading
2. Every pleading shall contain, and contain only, a statement in
a concise form of the material facts on which the party pleading relies
for his claim or defence, as the case may be, but not the evidence by
which they are to be proved, and shall, when necessary, be divided
into paragraphs, numbered consecutively. Dates, sums and numbers
shall be expressed in figures.
Pleading to state
material facts
and not
evidence
.

1 Rule 31 was added by section 5(i) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act
No. XXXVI of 2012).
Forms of
pleading
3. The forms in Appendix A when applicable, and where
they are not applicable forms of the like character, as nearly as
may be, shall be used for all pleadings.
Particulars to
be given
where
necessary
4. In all cases in which the party pleading relies on any
misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default, or
undue influence, and in all other cases in which particulars may
be necessary beyond such as are exemplified in the forms
aforesaid, particulars (with dates and items if necessary) shall
be stated in the pleading.
Further and
better
statement, or
particulars
5. A further and better statement of the nature of the
claim or defence, or further and better particulars of any matter
stated in any pleading, may in all cases be ordered, upon such
terms, as to costs and otherwise, as may be just.
Condition
precedent
6. Any condition precedent, the performance or
occurrence of which is intended to be contested, shall be
distinctly specified in his pleading by the plaintiff or defendant,
as the case may be; and, subject thereto, an averment of the
performance or occurrence of all conditions precedent
necessary for the case of the plaintiff or defendant shall be
implied in his pleading.
Departure 7. No pleading shall, except by way of amendment, raise
any new ground of claim or contain any allegation of fact
inconsistent with the previous pleadings of the party pleading
the same.
Denial of
contract
8. Where a contract is alleged in any pleading, a bare
denial of the same by the opposite party shall be construed only
as a denial in fact of the express contract alleged or of the
matters of fact from which the same may be implied, and not as
a denial of the legality or sufficiency in law of such contract.
Effect of
document to
be stated
9. Wherever the contents of any document are material, it
shall be sufficient in any pleading to state the effect thereof as
briefly as possible, without setting out the whole or any part
thereof, unless the precise words of the document or any part
thereof are material.
Malice,
knowledge,
etc.
10. Wherever it is material to allege malice, fraudulent
intention, knowledge or other condition of the mind of any person,
it shall be sufficient to allege the same as a fact without setting out
the circumstances from which the same is to be inferred.
.
11. Wherever it is material to allege notice to any person
of any fact, matter or thing, it shall be sufficient to allege such
notice as a fact, unless the form or the precise terms of such
notice, or the circumstances from which such notice is to be
inferred, are material.
Notice
12. Whenever any contract or any relation between any
persons is to be implied from a series of letters or conversations
or otherwise from a number of circumstances, it shall be
sufficient to allege such contract or relation as a fact, and to
refer generally to such letters, conversations or circumstances
without setting them out in detail. And if in such case the person
so pleading desires to rely in the alternative upon more contracts
or relations than one as to be implied from such circumstances,
he may state the same in the alternative.
Implied
contract, or
relation
13. Neither party need in any pleading allege any matter of
fact which the law presumes in his favour or as to which the
burden of proof lies upon the other side unless the same has first
been specifically denied (e.g., consideration for a bill of
exchange where the plaintiff sues only on the bill and not for the
consideration as a substantive ground of claim).
Presumptions
of law
14. Every pleading shall be signed by the party and his
pleader (if any): Provided that where a party pleading is, by
reason of absence or for other good cause, unable to sign the
pleading, it may be signed by any person duly authorized by him
to sign the same or to sue or defend on his behalf.
Pleading to
be signed
15. (1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time
being in force, every pleading shall be verified at the foot by the
party or by one of the parties pleading or by some other person
proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the
facts of the case.
Verification
of pleadings
(2) The person verifying shall specify, by reference to the
numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what he verifies of his
own knowledge and what he verifies upon information received
and believed to be true.
(3) The verification shall be signed by the person making
it and shall state the date on which and the place at which it was
signed.
.
Striking out
pleadings
16. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order to be
struck out or amended any matter in any pleading which may be
unnecessary or scandalous or which may tend to prejudice, embarrass
or delay the fair trial of the suit.
Amendment of
pleadings
17. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either
party to alter or amend his pleadings in such manner and on such
terms as may be just, and all such amendments shall be made as may
be necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in
controversy between the parties1
[:
Provided that no application for amendment shall be allowed
after the trial has commenced, unless the Court is of opinion that in
spite of due diligence, the party could not have raised the matter
before the commencement of trial:
Provided further that if an application for amendment is made
after the trial has commenced and the Court is of opinion that the
application is made to delay the proceedings, the Court shall make an
order for the payment to the objector such cost by way of
compensation as it thinks fit.]
Failure to
amend after
order
18. If a party who has obtained an order for leave to amend
does not amend accordingly within the time limited for that purpose
by the order, or if no time is thereby limited then within fourteen days
from the date of the order, he shall not be permitted to amend after
the expiration of such limited time as aforesaid or of such fourteen
days, as the case may be, unless the time is extended by the Court.
ORDER VII
PLAINT
Particulars to
be contained in
plaint
1. The plaint shall contain the following particulars:
(a) the name of the Court in which the suit is brought;
2
[(b) the name, description and place of residence (including
phone or mobile number, national identification number
(NID) and email address, if any, of the plaintiff;
(c) the name, description and place of residence (including phone
or mobile number, national identification number (NID) and
email address, if any, of the defendant so far as they can be
ascertained;]
(d) where the plaintiff or the defendant is a minor or a person of
unsound mind, a statement to that effect;

1 The colon (:) was substituted for the full-stop (.) and thereafter the provisos were added by
section 6 of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
2
 Clause (b) and (c) were substituted by section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
(e) the facts constituting the cause of action and when it arose;
(f) the facts showing that the Court has jurisdiction;
(g) the relief which the plaintiff claims;
(h) where the plaintiff has allowed a set-off or relinquished a
portion of his claim, the amount so allowed or relinquished;
and
(i) a statement of the value of the subject-matter of the suit for the
purposes of jurisdiction and of court-fees, so far as the case
admits.
.
2. Where the plaintiff seeks the recovery of money, the plaint
shall state the precise amount claimed:
In money suits
But where the plaintiff sues for mesne profits, or for an amount
which will be found due to him on taking unsettled accounts between
him and the defendant, the plaint shall state approximately the amount
sued for.
3. Where the subject-matter of the suit is immoveable property,
the plaint shall contain a description of the property sufficient to
identify it, and, in case such property can be identified by boundaries
or numbers in a record of settlement of survey, the plaint shall specify
such boundaries or numbers.
Where the
subject-matter
of the suit is
immoveable
property
4. Where the plaintiff sues in a representative character the plaint
shall show not only that he has an actual existing interest in the subjectmatter, but that he has taken the steps (if any) necessary to enable him
to institute a suit concerning it.
When plaintiff
sues as
representative
5. The plaint shall show that the defendant is or claims to be
interested in the subject-matter, and that he is liable to be called upon
to answer the plaintiff's demand.
Defendant's
interest and
liability to be
shown
6. Where the suit is instituted after the expiration of the period
prescribed by the law of limitation, the plaint shall show the ground
upon which exemption from such law is claimed.
Grounds of
exemption from
limitation law
7. Every plaint shall state specifically the relief which the
plaintiff claims either simply or in the alternative, and it shall not be
necessary to ask for general or other relief which may always be given
as the Court may think just to the same extent as if it had been asked
for. And the same rule shall apply to any relief claimed by the
defendant in his written statement.
Relief to be
specifically
stated
8. Where the plaintiff seeks relief in respect of several distinct
claims or causes of action founded upon separate and distinct grounds,
they shall be stated as far as may be separately and distinctly.
Relief founded
on separate
grounds
Procedure of
admitting plaint
9. (1) The plaintiff shall endorse on the plaint, or annex thereto,
a list of the documents (if any) which he has produced along with it;
and, if the plaint is admitted, shall present as many copies on plain
paper of the plaint as there are defendants, unless the Court by
reason of the length of the plaint or the number of the defendants, or
for any other sufficient reason, permits him to present a like number
of concise statements of the nature of the claim made, or of the relief
claimed in the suit, in which case he shall present such statements.
.
Concise
statements
(2) Where the plaintiff sues, or the defendant or any of the
defendants is sued, in a representative capacity, such statements shall
show in what capacity the plaintiff or defendant sues or is sued.
(3) The plaintiff may, by leave of the Court, amend such
statements so as to make them correspond with the plaint.
(4) The chief ministerial officer of the Court shall sign such list
and copies or statements if, on examination, he finds them to be
correct.
Return of
plaint
10. (1) The plaint shall at any stage of the suit be returned to
be presented to the Court in which the suit should have been
instituted.
Procedure on
returning
plaint
(2) On returning a plaint the Judge shall endorse thereon the
date of its presentation and return, the name of the party presenting it,
and a brief statement of the reasons for returning it.
Rejection of
plaint
11. The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action:
(b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the
plaintiff, on being required by the Court to correct
the valuation within a time to be fixed by the
Court, fails to do so:
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the
plaint is written upon paper insufficiently stamped,
and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to
supply the requisite stamp-paper within a time to
be fixed by the Court, fails to do so:
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the
plaint to be barred by any law 1
[:
.

1 A colon (;) was substituted, for the full-stop (.) and thereafter the proviso was added
by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983
(Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Provided that the time fixed by the Court for the
correction of the valuation or supplying of the requisite stamppaper shall not exceed twenty-one days.]
12. Where a plaint is rejected the Judge shall record an
order to that effect with the reasons for such order.
Procedure on
rejecting plaint
13. The rejection of the plaint on any of the grounds
hereinbefore mentioned shall not of its own force preclude the
plaintiff from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the same
cause of action.
Where rejection of
plaint does not
preclude
presentation of
fresh plaint
Documents Relied on in Plaint
1
[14. (1) Where a plaintiff relies upon documents in his
possession or power as evidence in support of his claims, he
shall produce them in Court when the plaint is presented, and
shall at the same time deliver the documents to be filed with the
plaint.
Production of
documents along
with the plaint
(2) The Court may return such documents on their being
substituted by photostat or true copies attested by the plaintiff's
pleader on the undertaking that they will be produced at the
time of hearing or whenever asked for by the Court.
(3) Where the plaintiff relies on any other documents not
in his possession or power in support of his claim, he shall enter
such documents in a list to be added or annexed to the plaint
and state in whose possession or power they are.]
15. Where any such document is not in the possession or
power of the plaintiff, he shall, if possible, state in whose
possession or power it is.
Statements in case
of documents not
in plaintiff's
possession or
power
16. Where the suit is founded upon a negotiable
instrument, and it is proved that the instrument is lost, and an
indemnity is given by the plaintiff, to the satisfaction of the
Court against the claims of any other person upon such
instrument, the Court may pass such decree as it would have
passed if the plaintiff had produced the instrument in Court
when the plaint was presented, and had at the same time
delivered a copy of the instrument to be filed with the plaint.
Suits on lost
negotiable
instruments
.

1 Rule 14 was substituted, for rule 14 by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Production of
shop-book
17. (1) Save in so far as is otherwise provided by the
Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 (XVIII of 1891), where the
document on which the plaintiff sues is an entry in a shop-book
or other account in his possession or power, the plaintiff shall
produce the book or account at the time of filing the plaint,
together with a copy of the entry on which he relies.
Original entry
to be marked
and returned
(2) The Court, or such officer as it appoints in this behalf,
shall forthwith mark the document for the purpose of
identification; and, after examining and comparing the copy with
the original, shall, if it is found correct, certify it to be so and
return the book to the plaintiff and cause the copy to be filed.
Inadmissibility
of document not
produced when
plaint filed
18. (1) A document which ought to be produced in Court
by the plaintiff when the plaint is presented, or to be entered in
the list to be added or annexed to the plaint, and which is not
produced or entered accordingly, shall not, without the leave of
the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing
of the suit 1
[:
Provided that the Court shall not grant such leave save in
exceptional circumstances.]
(2) Nothing in this rule applies to documents produced
for cross-examination of the defendant's witnesses, or in
answer to any case set up by the defendant or handed to a
witness merely to refresh his memory.
ORDER VIII
WRITTEN STATEMENT AND SET-OFF
Written
statement
2
[1. 3
[(1) The defendant shall, within thirty working days
from the date of service of summons upon him, save as
provided in the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 80, present
a written statement of his defence:
.

1 A colon (:) was substituted, for the full-stop (.) and thereafter the proviso was added by section
5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of
1983).
2 Rule I was substituted, by section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
3
Sub-rule (1) was substituted by section 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
Provided that where the defendant fails, for reasonable
grounds, to file the written statement within the said period of
thirty working days, he shall be allowed to file the same on such
other day, as may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, but which shall not exceed sixty working days
from the date of service of summons:
Provided further that if the defendant fails to file the written
statement within the said period of sixty working days, the Court
shall dispose of the suit ex parte.]
(2) Where the defendant relies upon documents in his
possession or power as evidence in support of his defence or claim
of set off, he shall produce them in Court when the written
statement is presented and shall at the same time deliver the
documents to be filed with the written statement.
(3) The Court may return such documents on their being
substituted by photostat or true copies attested by the defendant's
pleader on the undertaking that they will be produced at the time of
hearing or whenever asked for by the Court.
(4) Where the defendant relies on any other documents not in
his possession or power in support of his defence or claim of set
off, he shall enter such documents in a list to be added or annexed
to the written statement and state in whose possession or power
they are.
(5) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the
defendant when the written statement is presented, or to be entered
in the list to be added or annexed to the written statement, and
which is not produced or entered accordingly, shall not, without the
leave of the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the
hearing of the suit:
Provided that the Court shall not grant such leave in
exceptional circumstances.
(6) Nothing in sub-rule (5) applies to documents produced
for cross-examination of the plaintiff's witnesses, or in answer to
any case set up by the plaintiff or handed to a witness merely to
refresh his memory.]
2. The defendant must raise by his pleading all matters which
show the suit not to be maintainable, or that the transaction is either
void or voidable in point of law, and all such grounds of defence
as, if not raised, would be likely to take the opposite party by
surprise, or would raise issues of fact not arising out of the plaint,
as, for instance, fraud, limitation, release, payment, performance, or
facts showing illegality.
New facts must
be specially
pleaded
.
Denial to be
specific
3. It shall not be sufficient for a defendant in his written
statement to deny generally the grounds alleged by the plaintiff,
but the defendant must deal specifically with each allegation of
fact of which he does not admit the truth, except damages.
Evasive denial 4. Where a defendant denies an allegation of fact in the
plaint, he must not do so evasively, but answer the point of
substance. Thus, if it is alleged that he received a certain sum
of money, it shall not be sufficient to deny that he received that
particular amount, but he must deny that he received that sum or
any part thereof, or else set out how much he received. And if
an allegation is made with diverse circumstances, it shall not be
sufficient to deny it along with those circumstances.
Specific denial 5. Every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied
specifically or by necessary implication, or stated to be not
admitted in the pleading of the defendant, shall be taken to be
admitted except as against a person under disability:
Provided that the Court may in its discretion require any fact so
admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admission.
Particulars of
set-off to be
given in written
statement
6. (1) Where in a suit for the recovery of money the
defendant claims to set-off against the plaintiff, demand any
ascertained sum of money legally recoverable by him from the
plaintiff, not exceeding the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction
of the Court, and both parties fill the same character as they fill
in the plaintiff's suit, the defendant may, at the first hearing of
the suit, but not afterwards unless permitted by the Court,
present a written statement containing the particulars of the debt
sought to be set-off.
Effect of set-off (2) The written statement shall have the same effect as a
plaint in a cross-suit so as to enable the Court to pronounce a
final judgment in respect both of the original claim and of the
set-off: but this shall not affect the lien, upon the amount
decreed, of any pleader in respect of the costs payable to him
under the decree.
(3) The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant apply
to a written statement in answer to a claim of set-off.
.
.
Illustrations
(a) A bequeaths Taka 2,000 to B and appoints C his executor and
residuary legatee. B dies and D takes out administration to B's effects.
C pays Taka 1,000 as surety for D; then D sues C for the legacy. C
cannot set-off the debt of Taka 1,000 against the legacy, for neither C
nor D fills the same character with respect to the legacy as they fill with
respect to the payment of the Taka 1,000.
(b) A dies intestate and in debt to B. C takes out administration
to A's effects and B buys part of the effects from C. In a suit for the
purchase-money by C against B, the latter cannot set-off the debt
against the price, for C fills two different characters, one as the vendor
to B, in which he sues B, and the other as representative to A.
(c) A sues B on a bill of exchange. B alleges that A has
wrongfully neglected to insure B's goods and is liable to him in
compensation which he claims to set-off. The amount not being
ascertained cannot be set-off.
(d) A sues B on a bill of exchange for Taka 500. B holds a
judgment against A for Taka 1,000. The two claims being both definite
pecuniary demands may be set-off.
(e) A sues B for compensation on account of trespass. B holds a
promissory note for Taka 1,000 from A and claims to set-off that
amount against any sum that A may recover in the suit. B may do so,
for, as soon as A recovers, both sums are definite pecuniary demands.
(f) A and B sue for C for Taka 1,000. C cannot set-off a debt due
to him by A alone.
(g) A sues B and C for Taka 1,000. B cannot set-off a debt due
to him alone by A.
(h) A owes the partnership firm of B and C Taka 1,000. B dies,
leaving C surviving. A sues C for a debt of Taka 1,500 due in his
separate character. C may set-off the debt of Taka 1,000.
7. Where the defendant relies upon several distinct
grounds of defence or set-off founded upon separate and distinct
facts, they shall be stated, as far as may be, separately and
distinctly.
Defence or
set-off
founded on
separate
grounds
8. Any ground of defence which has arisen after the
institution of the suit or the presentation of a written statement
claiming a set-off may be raised by the defendant or plaintiff, as
the case may be, in his written statement.
New ground of
defence
.
Subsequent
pleadings
9. No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a
defendant other than by way of defence to a set-off shall be
presented except by the leave of the Court and upon such
terms as the Court thinks fit, but the Court may at any time
require a written statement or additional written statement
from any of the parties and fix a time for presenting the same.
Procedure when
party fails to
present written
statement called
for by Court
10. Where any party from whom a written statement is
so required fails to present the same within the time fixed by
the Court, the Court may pronounce judgment against him, or
make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit.
ORDER IX
APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCE OF
NON-APPEARANCE
Parties to
appear on day
fixed in
summons for
defendant to
appear and
answer
1. On the day fixed in the summons for the defendant to
appear and answer, the parties shall be in attendance at the
Court-house in person or by their respective pleaders, and the
suit shall then be heard unless the hearing is adjourned to a
future day fixed by the Court.
Dismissal of
suit where
summons not
served in
consequence
of plaintiff's
failure to pay
costs
2. Where on the day so fixed it is found that the
summons has not been served upon the defendant in
consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court-fee
or postal charges (if any) chargeable for such service, the
Court may make an order that the suit be dismissed:
Provided that no such order shall be made although the
summons has not been served upon the defendant, if on the
day fixed for him to appear and answer he attends in person or
by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent.
Where neither
party appears,
suit to be
dismissed
3. Where neither party appears when the suit is called on
for hearing, the Court may make an order that the suit be
dismissed.
Plaintiff may
bring fresh
suit or Court
may restore
suit to file
4. Where a suit is dismissed under rule 2 or rule 3, the
plaintiff may (subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh
suit; or he may apply for an order to set the dismissal aside,
and if he satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cause for
his not paying the court-fee and postal charges (if any) required
within the time fixed before the issue of the summons, or for his
non-appearance, as the case may be, the Court shall make an
order setting aside the dismissal and shall appoint a day for
proceeding with the suit.
5. (1) Where, after a summons has been issued to the
defendant, or to one of several defendants, and returned
unserved, the plaintiff fails, for a period of 2
[one month] from
the date of return made to the Court by the officer ordinarily
certifying to the Court returns made by the serving officers, to
apply for the issue of a fresh summons the Court shall make an
order that the suit be dismissed as against such defendant,
unless the plaintiff has within the said period satisfied the Court
that
Dismissal of
suit where
plaintiff, after
summons
returned
unserved, fails
for 1
[one
month] to
apply for fresh
summons
(a) he has failed after using his best endeavours to
discover the residence of the defendant who
has not been served, or
(b) such defendant is avoiding service of process, or
(c) there is any other sufficient cause for extending
the time, in which case the Court may extend
the time for making such application for such
period as it thinks fit.
(2) In such case the plaintiff may (subject to the law of
limitation) bring a fresh suit.
6. (1) Where the plaintiff appears and the defendant does
not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, then
Procedure when
only plaintiff
appears
(a) if it is proved that the summons was duly
served, the Court may proceed ex parte;
When summons
duly served
(b) if it is not proved that the summons was duly
served, the Court shall direct a second
summons to be issued and served on the
defendant;
When
summons not
duly served
(c) if it is proved that the summons was served on
the defendant, but not in sufficient time to
enable him to appear and answer on the day
fixed in the summons, the Court shall postpone
the hearing of the suit to a future day to be
fixed by the Court, and shall direct notice of
such day to be given to the defendant.
When
summons
served, but not
in due time

1 The words “one month” were substituted for the words “three months” in the marginal heading
by section 8(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of
2012).
1 The words “one month” were substituted for the words “three months” by section 8(b) of the
Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
(2) Where it is owing to the plaintiff's default that the
summons was not duly served or was not served in sufficient
time, the Court shall order the plaintiff to pay the costs
occasioned by the postponement.
Procedure
where
defendant
appears on
day of
adjourned
hearing and
assigns good
cause for
previous nonappearance
7. Where the Court has adjourned the hearing of the suit
ex parte, and the defendant, at or before such hearing, appears
and assigns good cause for his previous non-appearance, he
may, upon such terms as the Court directs as to costs or
otherwise, be heard in answer to the suit as if he had appeared
on the day fixed for his appearance.
Procedure
where
defendant
only appears
8. Where the defendant appears and the plaintiff does
not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, the Court
shall make an order that the suit be dismissed, unless the
defendant admits the claim, or part thereof, in which case the
Court shall pass a decree against the defendant upon such
admission, and, where part only of the claim has been
admitted, shall dismiss the suit so far as it relates to the
remainder.
Decree
against
plaintiff by
default bars
fresh suit
9. (1) Where a suit is wholly or partly dismissed under
rule 8, the plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a fresh
suit in respect of the same cause of action. But he may apply
for an order to set the dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the
Court that there was sufficient cause for his non-appearance
when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make
an order setting aside the dismissal upon such terms as to costs
or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for
proceeding with the suit.
(2) No order shall be made under this rule unless notice
of the application has been served on the opposite party.
Directly
setting aside
dismissal
1
[9A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 9
or any other law, the Court may, in order to avoid delay and
expedite disposal, directly set aside the dismissal without
requiring the plaintiff to adduce evidence to satisfy it about

1 Rule 9A was inserted by section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006).
sufficient causes as required under rule 9, but requiring him to
pay such cost not exceeding one thousand taka as it may deem
appropriate and determine:
Provided that the dismissal under rule 8 shall not be set
aside under this rule, unless an application, supported by
affidavit, praying for setting aside the order of dismissal is made
to the Court within thirty days of the date on which the order of
dismissal is made:
Provided further that no dismissal shall be set aside more
than once under this rule.
(2) As soon as an order under sub-rule (1) is made setting
aside ex parte dismissal, the Court shall cause notice thereof to
be served at the cost of the plaintiff upon the defendant who
appeared in the suit.]
10. Where there are more plaintiffs than one, and one or
more of them appear, and the others do not appear, the Court
may, at the instance of the plaintiff or plaintiffs appearing,
permit the suit to proceed in the same way as if all the plaintiffs
had appeared, or make such order as it thinks fit.
Procedure in
case of nonattendance of
one or more of
several
plaintiffs
11. Where there are more defendants than one, and one or
more of them appear, and the others do not appear, the suit shall
proceed, and the Court shall, at the time of pronouncing
judgment, make such order as it thinks fit with respect to the
defendants who do not appear.
Procedure in
case of nonattendance of
one or more of
several
defendants
12. Where a plaintiff or defendant, who has been ordered
to appear in person, does not appear in person, or show
sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the Court for failing so to
appear, he shall be subject to all the provisions of the foregoing
rules applicable to plaintiffs and defendants, respectively, who
do not appear.
Consequence
of nonattendance,
without
sufficient cause
shown, of party
ordered to
appear in
person
Setting aside Decrees Ex Parte
13.(1) In any case in which a decree is passed ex parte
against a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the
decree was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he satisfies
the Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was
prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit
was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting
aside the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs,
Setting aside
decree ex parte
against
defendant
.
payment into Court or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day
for proceeding with the suit:
 Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot
be set aside as against such defendant only it may be set aside as
against all or any of the other defendants also1
[:
 Provided further that no decree shall be set aside more than once
under this rule at the instance of the same defendant.]

(2) Provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 shall
apply to the applications under rule 13 (1) of this order.
Directly setting
aside ex parte
decree
2
[13A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 13 or any
other law, the Court may, in order to avoid delay and expedite
disposal, directly set aside the decree without requiring the defendant
to adduce evidence to satisfy it about sufficient causes as required
under rule 13, but requiring him to pay such cost not exceeding three
thousand taka as it may deem appropriate and determine:
Provided that the decree under this rule shall not be set aside unless
an application, supported by affidavit, praying for setting aside the decree
is made to the Court within thirty days of the date on which the decree is
passed by the defendant who appeared and filed written statement:
Provided further that no decree shall be set aside more than once
under this rule at the instance of the same defendant.
(2) As soon as an order under sub-rule (1) is made setting aside
an ex parte decree, the Court shall cause notice thereof to be served at
the cost of the defendant upon the plaintiff.]
No decree to be
set aside without
notice to
opposite party
14. No decree shall be set aside on any such application as
aforesaid unless notice thereof has been served on the opposite party.
Restoration of a
suit where the
dismissal is setaside
3
[15. Where the dismissal of a suit is set aside under rule 4 or
rule 9 or a decree is set aside under rule 13, the suit shall on
restoration, proceed from the stage where it was immediately before
the making of the order of dismissal or passing of the decree.]

1
 The colon “:” was substituted for the full stop “.” and thereafter proviso was inserted
by section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025
(Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
2 Rule 13A was inserted by section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006).
3 Rule 15 was added by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
ORDER X
EXAMINATION OF PARTIES BY THE COURT
1. At the first hearing of the suit the Court shall ascertain
from each party or his pleader whether he admits or denies such
allegations of fact as are made in the plaint or written statement
(if any) of the opposite party, and as are not expressly or by
necessary implication admitted or denied by the party against
whom they are made. The Court shall record such admissions
and denials.
Ascertainment
whether
allegations in
pleadings are
admitted or
denied
2. At the first hearing of the suit, or at any subsequent
hearing, any party appearing in person or present in Court, or
any person able to answer any material questions relating to the
suit by whom such party or his pleader is accompanied, may be
examined orally by the Court; and the Court may, if it thinks fit,
put in the course of such examination questions suggested by
either party.
Oral
examination of
party or
companion of
party
3. The substance of the examination shall be reduced to
writing by the Judge, and shall form part of the record.
Substance of
examination to
be written
4. (1) Where the pleader of any party who appears by a
pleader or any such person accompanying a pleader as is
referred to in rule 2, refuses or is unable to answer any material
question relating to the suit which the Court is of opinion that
the party whom he represents ought to answer, and is likely to
be able to answer if interrogated in person, the Court may
postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day and direct that
such party shall appear in person on such day.
Consequence of
refusal or
inability of
pleader to
answer
(2) If such party fails without lawful excuse to appear in
person on the day so appointed, the Court may pronounce
judgment against him, or make such order in relation to the suit
as it thinks fit.
ORDER XI
DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
Discovery by
interrogatories
1. In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the
Court may 1
[, within ten days from the date of framing of
issues,] deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination
of the opposite parties or any one or more of such parties, and
such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the
foot thereof stating which of such interrogatories each of such
persons is required to answer: Provided that no party shall
deliver more than one set of interrogatories to the same party
without an order for that purpose: Provided also that
interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question
in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that
they might be admissible on the oral cross-examination of a
witness.
Particular
interrogatories to
be submitted
2. On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories,
the particular interrogatories proposed to be delivered 2
[shall
be submitted to the Court and that Court shall decide within fourteen
days from the date of filing of the said application]. In deciding
upon such application, the Court shall take into account any
offer, which may be made by the party sought to be
interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make admissions, or
to produce documents relating to the matters in question, or
any of them, and leave shall be given as to such only of the
interrogatories submitted as the Court shall consider necessary
either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
Costs of
interrogatories
3. In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the
instance of any party be made into the propriety of exhibiting
such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing
officer or of the Court, either with or without an application
for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs
occasioned by the said interrogatories and the answers thereto
shall be paid in any event by the party in fault.

1 The commas and words ", within ten days from the date of framing of issues," were inserted by
of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of
1983).
2 The words “shall be submitted to the Court and that Court shall decide within fourteen days
from the date of filing of the said application” were substituted for the words “shall be
submitted to the Court” by section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012
(Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
4. Interrogatories shall be in Form No. 2 in Appendix C,
with such variations as circumstances may require.
Form of
interrogatories
5. Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of
persons, whether incorporated or not, empowered by law to sue
or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any
officer or other person, any opposite party may apply for an
order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any member or
officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made
accordingly.
Corporations
6. Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the
ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona
fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired into
are not sufficiently material at that stage, or on any other
ground, may be taken in the affidavit in answer.
Objections to
interrogatories
by answer
7. Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that
they have been exhibited unreasonably or vexatiously, or struck
out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary
or scandalous; and any application for this purpose may be
made within seven days after service of the interrogatories.
Setting aside
and striking out
interrogatories
8. Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed
within ten days 1
[* * *].
Affidavit in
answer, filing
9. An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in
Form No. 3 in Appendix C, with such variations as
circumstances may require.
Form of
affidavit in
answer
10. No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in
answer, but the sufficiency or otherwise of any such affidavit
objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the Court.
No exception
to be taken
11. Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or
answers insufficiently, the party interrogating may apply to the
Court for an order requiring him to answer, or to answer further,
as the case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to
answer or answer further, either by affidavit or by viva voce
examination, as the Court may direct.
Order to
answer or
answer further

1 The comma and words ", or within such other time as the Court may allow" were
omitted by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983
(Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Application
for discovery
of documents
12. Any party may, without filing any affidavit, apply to
the Court for an order directing any other party to any suit to
make discovery on oath of the documents which are or had
been in his possession or power, relating to any matter in
question therein. On the hearing of such application the Court
may either refuse or adjourn the same, if satisfies that such
discovery is not necessary, or not necessary at that stage of the
suit, or make such order, either generally or limited to certain
classes of documents, as may, in its discretion, be thought fit:
Provided that discovery shall not be ordered when and so far
as the Court shall be of opinion that it is not necessary either
for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
Affidavit of
documents
13. The affidavit to be made by a party against whom
such order as is mentioned in the last preceding rule has been
made, shall specify which (if any) of the documents therein
mentioned he objects to produce, and it shall be in Form No. 5
in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may
require.
Production of
documents
14. It shall be lawful for the Court, at any time during
the pendency of any suit, to order the production by any party
thereto, upon oath, of such of the documents in his possession
or power, relating to any matter in question in such suit, as the
Court shall think right; and the Court may deal with such
documents, when produced, in such manner as shall appear
just.
Inspection of
documents
referred to in
pleadings or
affidavits
15. Every party to a suit shall be entitled at any time to
give notice to any other party, in whose pleadings or affidavits
reference is made to any document, to produce such document
for the inspection of the party giving such notice, or of his
pleader, and to permit him or them to take copies thereof; and
any party not complying with such notice shall not afterwards
be at liberty to put any such document in evidence on his
behalf in such suit unless he shall satisfy the Court that such
document relates only to his own title, he being a defendant to
the suit, or that he had some other cause or excuse which the
Court shall deem sufficient for not complying with such
notice, in which case the Court may allow the same to be put
in evidence on such terms as to costs and otherwise as the
Court shall think fit.
.
16. Notice to any party to produce any documents
referred to in his pleading or affidavits shall be in Form No. 7 in
Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.
Notice to
produce
17. The party to whom such notice is given shall, within
ten days from the receipt of such notice, deliver to the party
giving the same a notice stating a time within three days from
the delivery thereof at which the documents, or such of them as
he does not object to produce, may be inspected at the office of
his pleader, or in the case of bankers' books or other books of
account or books in constant use for the purposes of any trade or
business, at their usual place of custody, and stating which (if
any) of the documents he objects to produce, and on what
ground. Such notice shall be in Form No. 8 in Appendix C, with
such variations as circumstances may require.
Time for
inspection
when notice
given
18. (1) Where the party served with notice under rule 15
omits to give such notice of a time for inspection or objects to
give inspection, or offers inspection elsewhere than at the office
of his pleader, the Court may, on the application of the party
desiring it, make an order for inspection in such place and in
such manner as it may think fit: Provided that the order shall
not be made when and so far as the Court shall be of opinion
that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or
for saving costs.
Order for
inspection
(2) Any application to inspect documents, except such as
are referred to in the pleadings, particulars or affidavits of the
party against whom the application is made or disclosed in his
affidavit of documents, shall be founded upon an affidavit
showing of what documents inspection is sought, that the party
applying is entitled to inspect them, and that they are in the
possession or power of the other party. The Court shall not
make such order for inspection of such documents, when and so
far as the Court shall be of opinion that it is not necessary either
for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
Verified
copies
Verified copies 19. (1) Where inspection of any business books is
applied for, the Court may, if it thinks fit, instead of ordering
inspection of the original books, order a copy of any entries
therein to be furnished and verified by the affidavit of some
person who has examined the copy with the original entries,
and such affidavit shall state whether or not there are in the
original book any and what erasures, interlineations or
alterations: Provided that, notwithstanding that such copy has
been supplied, the Court may order inspection of the book
from which the copy was made.
(2) Where on an application for an order for inspection
privilege is claimed for any document, it shall be lawful for
the Court to inspect the document for the purpose of deciding
as to the validity of the claim of privilege.
(3) The Court may, on the application of any party to a
suit at any time, and whether an affidavit of documents shall
or shall not have already been ordered or made, make an order
requiring any other party to state by affidavit whether any one
or more specific documents, to be specified in the application,
is or are, or has or have at any time been, in his possession or
power; and, if not then in his possession, when he parted with
the same and what has become thereof. Such application shall
be made on an affidavit stating that in the belief of the
deponent the party against whom the application is made has,
or has at some time had, in his possession or power the
document or documents specified in the application, and that
they relate to the matters in question in the suit, or to some of
them.
Premature
discovery
20. Where the party from whom discovery of any kind
or inspection is sought objects to the same, or any part
thereof, the Court may, if satisfied that the right to the
discovery or inspection sought depends on the determination
of any issue or question in dispute in the suit, or that for any
other reason it is desirable that any issue or question in
dispute in the suit should be determined before deciding upon
the right to the discovery or inspection, order that such issue
or question be determined first, and reserve the question as to
the discovery or inspection.
.
21. Where any party fails to comply with any order to answer
interrogatories, or for discovery or inspection of documents, he shall,
if a plaintiff, be liable to have his suit dismissed for want of
prosecution, and, if a defendant, to have his defence, if any, struck
out, and to be placed in the same position as if he had not defended,
and the party interrogating or seeking discovery or inspection may
apply to the Court for an order to that effect, and an order may be
made accordingly.
Noncompliance
with order for
discovery
22. Any party may, at the trial of a suit, use in evidence any one
or more of the answers or any party of an answer of the opposite party
to interrogatories without putting in the others or the whole of such
answer: Provided always that in such case the Court may look at the
whole of the answers, and if it shall be of opinion that any others of
them are so connected with those put in that the last-mentioned
answers ought not to be used without them, it may direct them to be
put in.
Using answers
to
interrogatories
at trial
23. This order shall apply to minor plaintiffs and defendants,
and to the next friends and guardians for the suit of persons under
disability.
Order to apply
to minors
ORDER XII
ADMISSIONS
1. Any party to a suit may give notice, by his pleading, or
otherwise in writing, that he admits the truth of the whole or any part
of the case of any other party.
Notice of
admission of
case
2. Either party may call upon the other party 1
[to admit, within
fifteen days from the date of service of notice, any document], saving
all just exceptions; and in case of refusal or neglect to admit, after
such notice, the costs of proving any such document shall be paid by
the party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the suit may
be, unless the Court otherwise directs; and no costs of proving any
document shall be allowed unless such notice is given, except where
the omission to give the notice is, in the opinion of the Court, a saving
of expense.
Notice to admit
documents
.

1 The words and commas, “to admit, within fifteen days from the date of service of notice, any
document” were substituted for the words “to admit any document” by section 10 of the Code
of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
Form of
notice
3. A notice to admit documents shall be in Form No. 9 in
Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may
require.
Notice to
admit facts
4. Any party may, by notice in writing, at any time not
later than nine days before the day fixed for the hearing, call
on any other party to admit, for the purposes of the suit only,
any specific fact or facts mentioned in such notice. And in
case of refusal or neglect to admit the same within six days
after service of such notice, or within such further time as may
be allowed by the Court, the costs of proving such fact or facts
shall be paid by the party so neglecting or refusing, whatever
the result of the suit may be, unless the Court otherwise
directs: Provided that any admission made in pursuance of
such notice is to be deemed to be made only for the purposes
of the particular suit, and not as an admission to be used
against the party on any other occasion or in favour of any
person other than the party giving the notice: Provided also
that the Court may at any time allow any party to amend or
withdraw any admission so made on such terms as may be
just.
Form of
admission
5. A notice to admit facts shall be in Form No. 10 in
Appendix C, and admissions of facts shall be in Form No. 11
in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may
require.
Judgment on
admissions
6. Any party may, at any stage of a suit, where
admissions of fact have been made, either on the pleadings, or
otherwise, apply to the Court for such judgment or order as
upon such admissions he may be entitled to, without waiting
for the determination of any other question between the
parties, and the Court may upon such application make such
order, or give such judgment, as the Court may think just.
Affidavit of
signature
7. An affidavit of the pleader or his clerk, of the due
signature of any admissions made in pursuance of any notice
to admit documents or facts, shall be sufficient evidence of
such admissions, if evidence thereof is required.
.
8. Notice to produce documents shall be in Form No. 12 in
Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.
An affidavit of the pleader, or his clerk, of the service of any
notice to produce, and of the time when it was served, with a
copy of the notice to produce, shall in all cases be sufficient
evidence of the service of the notice, and of the time when it
was served.
Notice to
produce
documents
9. If a notice to admit or produce specifies documents
which are not necessary, the costs occasioned thereby shall be
borne by the party giving such notice.
Costs
ORDER XIII
PRODUCTION, IMPOUNDING AND RETURN OF DOCUMENTS
1 and 2. [Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983),
section 5.]
3. The Court may at any stage of the suit reject any
document which it considers irrelevant or otherwise
inadmissible, recording the grounds of such rejection.
Rejection of
irrelevant or in
-admissible
documents
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of the next following subrule, there shall be endorsed on every document which has been
admitted in evidence in the suit the following particulars,
namely:
Endorsements
on documents
admitted in
evidence
(a) the number and title of the suit,
(b) the name of the person producing the document,
(c) the date on which it was produced, and
(d) a statement of its having been so admitted;
and the endorsement shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.
(2) Where a document so admitted is an entry in a book,
account or record, and a copy thereof has been substituted for
the original under the next following rule, the particulars
aforesaid shall be endorsed on the copy and the endorsement
thereon shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.
.
Endorsements
on copies of
admitted
entries in
books,
accounts and
records
5. (1) Save in so far as is otherwise provided by the
Banker's Books Evidence Act, 1891, where a document
admitted in evidence in the suit is an entry in a letter-book or a
shop-book or other account in current use, the party on whose
behalf the book or account is produced may furnish a copy of
the entry.
(2) Where such a document is an entry in a public record
produced from a public office or by a public officer, or an
entry in a book or account belonging to a person other than a
party on whose behalf the book or account is produced, the
Court may require a copy of the entry to be furnished-
(a) where the record, book or account is produced on
behalf of a party, then by that party, or
(b) where the record, book or account is produced in
obedience to an order of the Court acting of its own
motion, then by either or any party.
(3) Where a copy of an entry is furnished under the
foregoing provisions of this rule, the Court shall, after causing
the copy to be examined, compared and certified in manner
mentioned in rule 17 of Order VII, mark the entry and cause
the book, account or record in which it occurs to be returned
to the person producing it.
Endorsements
on documents
rejected as
inadmissible
in evidence
6. Where a document relied on as evidence by either
party is considered by the Court to be inadmissible in
evidence, there shall be endorsed thereon the particulars
mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of rule 4, sub-rule (1),
together with a statement of its having been rejected, and the
endorsement shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.
Recording of
admitted and
return of
rejected
documents
7. (1) Every document which has been admitted in
evidence, or a copy thereof where a copy has been substituted
for the original under rule 5, shall form part of the record of
the suit.
(2) Documents not admitted in evidence shall not form
part of the record and shall be returned to the persons
respectively producing them.
.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 5 or rule 7
of this Order or in rule 17 of Order VII, the Court may, if it sees
sufficient cause, direct any document or book produced before it
in any suit to be impounded and kept in the custody of an officer
of the Court, for such period and subject to such conditions as
the Court thinks fit.
Court may
order any
document to
be impounded
9. (1) Any person, whether a party to the suit or not,
desirous of receiving back any document produced by him in
the suit and placed on the record shall, unless the document is
impounded under rule 8, be entitled to receive back the same,-
Return of
admitted
documents
(a) where the suit is one in which an appeal is not
allowed, when the suit has been disposed of, and
(b) where the suit is one in which an appeal is allowed,
when the Court is satisfied that the time for
preferring an appeal has elapsed and that no appeal
has been preferred or, if an appeal has been
preferred, when the appeal has been disposed of:
Provided that a document may be returned at any time
earlier than that prescribed by this rule if the person applying
therefor delivers to the proper officer a certified copy to be
substituted for the original and undertakes to produce the
original if required to do so:
Provided also that no document shall be returned which,
by force of the decree, has become wholly void or useless.
(2) On the return of a document admitted in evidence, a
receipt shall be given by the person receiving it.
10. (1) The Court may of its own motion, and may in its
discretion upon the application of any of the parties to a suit,
send for, either from its own records or from any other Court,
the record of any other suit or proceeding, and inspect the same.
Court may
send for
papers from its
own records or
from other
Courts (2) Every application made under this rule shall (unless
the Court otherwise directs) be supported by an affidavit
showing how the record is material to the suit in which the
application is made, and that the applicant cannot without
unreasonable delay or expense obtain a duly authenticated copy
of the record or of such portion thereof as the applicant requires,
or that the production of the original is necessary for the
purposes of justice.
.
(3) Nothing contained in this rule shall be deemed to
enable the Court to use in evidence any document which under
the law of evidence would be inadmissible in the suit.
Provisions as
to documents
applied to
material
objects
11. The provisions herein contained as to documents
shall, so far as may be, apply to all other material objects
producible as evidence.
ORDER XIV
SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES AND DETERMINATION OF SUIT ON
ISSUES OF LAW OR ON ISSUES AGREED UPON
Framing of
issues
1. (1) Issues arise when a material proposition of fact or
law is affirmed by the one party and denied by the other.
(2) Material propositions are those propositions of law or
fact which a plaintiff must allege in order to show a right to sue
or a defendant must allege in order to constitute his defence.
(3) Each material proposition affirmed by one party and
denied by the other shall form the subject of a distinct issue.
(4) Issues are of two kinds: (a) issues of fact, (b) issues of
law.
(5) At the first hearing of the suit the Court shall, after
reading the plaint and the written statements, if any, and after
such examination of the parties as may appear necessary,
ascertain upon what material propositions of fact or of law the
parties are at variance, and shall thereupon proceed to frame
and record the issues on which the right decision of the case
appears to depend 1
[:
Provided that in any case the issues shall be framed and
recorded, subject to the provisions of rules 4 and 5, within
fifteen days from the date of first hearing of the suit or the date
of filing of the written statement, whichever is later.]
(6) Nothing in this rule requires the Court to frame and
record issues where the defendant at the first hearing of the suit
makes no defence.
.

1 A colon ":" was substituted, for the full-stop "." and thereafter the proviso was added
by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983
(Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
2. Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit,
and the Court is of opinion that the case or any part thereof may be
disposed of on the issues of law only, it shall try those issues first, and
for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the
issues of fact until after the issues of law have been determined.
Issues of law
and of fact
3. The Court may frame the issues from all or any of the
following materials:
Materials from
which issues
may be framed (a) allegations made on oath by the parties, or by any
persons present on their behalf, or made by the
pleaders of such parties;
(b) allegations made in the pleadings or in answers to
interrogatories delivered in the suit;
(c) the contents of documents produced by either party.
4. Where the Court is of opinion that the issues cannot be
correctly framed without the examination of some person not before
the Court or without the inspection of some document not produced in
the suit, it 1
[ may adjourn the framing of the issues to a day not later
than fifteen days], and may (subject to any law for the time being in
force) compel the attendance of any person or the production of any
document by the person in whose possession or power it is by
summons or other process.
Court may
examine
witness or
documents
before framing
issues
5. (1) The Court may at any time before passing a decree amend
the issues or frame additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit, and
all such amendments or additional issues as may be necessary for
determining the matters in controversy between the parties shall be so
made or framed.
Power to
amend, and
strike out,
issues
(2) The Court may also, at any time before passing a decree,
strike out any issues that appear to it to be wrongly framed or
introduced.
6. Where the parties to a suit are agreed as to the question
of fact or of law to be decided between them, they may state the
same in the form of an issue, and enter into an agreement in
writing that, upon the finding of the Court in the affirmative or
the negative of such issue,
Questions of
fact or law
may by
agreement be
stated in form
of issues (a) a sum of money specified in the agreement or to be
ascertained by the Court, or in such manner as the
Court may direct, shall be paid by one of the parties
.
.

1 The words “may adjourn the framing of the issues to a day not later than fifteen days” were
substituted for the words “may adjourn the framing of the issues to a future day” by section 11
of The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012 (Act No. XXXVI of 2012).
to the other of them, or that one of them be declared
entitled to some right or subject to some liability
specified in the agreement;
(b) some property specified in the agreement and in
dispute in the suit shall be delivered by one of the
parties to the other of them, or as that other may
direct; or
(c) one or more of the parties shall do or abstain from
doing some particular act specified in the agreement
and relating to the matter in dispute.
Court, if
satisfied that
agreement
was executed
in good faith,
may
pronounce
judgment
7. Where the Court is satisfied, after making such
inquiry as it deems proper,
(a) that the agreement was duly executed by the parties,
(b) that they have a substantial interest in the decision of
such question as aforesaid, and
(c) that the same is fit to be tried and decided,
it shall proceed to record and try the issue and state its finding
or decision thereon in the same manner as if the issue had
been framed by the Court;
and shall, upon the finding or decision on such issue,
pronounce judgment according to the terms of the agreement;
and, upon the judgment so pronounced, a decree shall follow.
Fixing date
for final
hearing
1
[8. After the issues are framed, the Court shall, within
one hundred and twenty days thereof, fix a date for final
hearing of the suit.]
ORDER XV
DISPOSAL OF THE SUIT AT THE FIRST HEARING
Parties not at
issue
1. Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the
parties are not at issue on any question of law or of fact, the
Court may at once pronounce judgment.
One of
several
defendants
not at issue
2. Where there are more defendants than one, and any
one of the defendants is not at issue with the plaintiff on any
question of law or of fact, the Court may at once pronounce
judgment for or against such defendant and the suit shall
proceed only against the other defendants.
.

1 Rule 8 was added by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
3. (1) Where the parties are at issue on some question of
law or of fact, and issues have been framed by the Court as
hereinbefore provided, if the Court is satisfied that no further
argument or evidence than the parties can at once adduce is
required upon such of the issues as may be sufficient for the
decision of the suit, and that no injustice will result from
proceeding with the suit forthwith, the Court may proceed to
determine such issues, and, if the finding thereon is sufficient
for the decision, may pronounce judgment accordingly, whether
the summons has been issued for the settlement of issues only or
for the final disposal of the suit:
Parties at issue
Provided that, where the summons has been issued for the
settlement of issues only, the parties or their pleaders are
present and none of them objects.
(2) Where the finding is not sufficient for the decision, the
Court shall postpone the further hearing of the suit, and shall fix
a day for the production of such further evidence, or for such
further argument as the case requires.
4. Where the summons has been issued for the final
disposal of the suit and either party fails without sufficient
cause to produce the evidence on which he relies, the Court may
at once pronounce judgment, or may, if it thinks fit, after
framing and recording issues adjourn the suit for the production
of such evidence as may be necessary for its decision upon such
issues.
Failure to
produce
evidence
ORDER XVI
SUMMONING AND ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES
1. At any time after the suit is instituted, the parties may
obtain, on application to the Court or to such officer as it
appoints in this behalf, summonses to persons whose attendance
is required either to give evidence or to produce documents.
Summons to
attend to give
evidence or
produce
documents
2. (1) The party applying for a summons shall, before the
summons is granted and within a period to be fixed, pay into
Court such a sum of money as appears to the Court to be
sufficient to defray the travelling and other expenses of the
person summoned in passing to and from the Court in which he
is required to attend, and for one day's attendance.
Expenses of
witness to be
paid into Court
on applying
for summons
.
Experts (2) In determining the amount payable under this rule,
the Court may, in the case of any person summoned to give
evidence as an expert, allow reasonable remuneration for the
time occupied both in giving evidence and in performing any
work of an expert character necessary for the case.
Scale of
expenses
(3) Whether the Court is subordinate to the High Court
Division, regard shall be had, in fixing the scale of such
expenses, to any rules made in that behalf.
Tender of
expenses to
witness
3. The sum so paid into Court shall be tendered to the
person summoned, at the time of serving the summons, if it
can be served personally.
Procedure
where
insufficient
sum paid in
4. (1) Where it appears to the Court or to such officer as
it appoints in this behalf that the sum paid into Court is not
sufficient to cover such expenses or reasonable remuneration,
the Court may direct such further sum to be paid to the person
summoned as appears to be necessary on that account, and, in
case of default in payment, may order such sum to be levied
by attachment and sale of the moveable property of the party
obtaining the summons; or the Court may discharge the person
summoned, without requiring him to give evidence; or may
both order such levy and discharge such person as aforesaid.
Expenses of
witnesses
detained more
than one day
(2) Where it is necessary to detain the person summoned
for a longer period than one day, the Court may, from time to
time, order the party at whose instance he was summoned to
pay into Court such sum as is sufficient to defray the expenses
of his detention for such further period, and, in default of such
deposit being made, may order such sum to be levied by
attachment and sale of the moveable property of such party; or
the Court may discharge the person summoned without
requiring him to give evidence; or may both order such levy
and discharge such person as aforesaid.
Time, place
and purpose
of attendance
to be
specified in
summons
5. Every summons for the attendance of a person to give
evidence or to produce a document shall specify the time and
place at which he is required to attend, and also whether his
attendance is required for the purpose of giving evidence or to
produce a document, or for both purposes; and any particular
document, which the person summoned is called on to
produce, shall be described in the summons with reasonable
accuracy.
.
6. Any person may be summoned to produce a document,
without being summoned to give evidence; and any person
summoned merely to produce a document shall be deemed to
have complied with the summons if he causes such document to
be produced instead of attending personally to produce the
same.
Summons to
produce
document
7. Any person present in Court may be required by the
Court to give evidence or to produce any document then and
there in his possession or power.
Power to
require
persons
present in
Court to give
evidence or
produce
document
8. Every summons under this Order shall be served as
nearly as may be in the same manner as a summons to a
defendant, and the rules in Order V as to proof of service shall
apply in the case of all summonses served under this rule.
Summons how
served
9. Service shall in all cases be made a sufficient time
before the time specified in the summons for the attendance of
the person summoned, to allow him a reasonable time for
preparation and for travelling to the place at which his
attendance is required.
Time for
serving
summons
10. (1) Where a person to whom a summons has been
issued either to attend to give evidence or to produce a
document fails to attend or to produce the document in
compliance with such summons, the Court shall, if the
certificate of the serving-officer has not been verified by
affidavit, and may, if it has been so verified, examine the
serving-officer on oath, or cause him to be so examined by
another Court, touching the service or non-service of the
summons.
Procedure
where witness
fails to comply
with summons
(2) Where the Court sees reason to believe that such
evidence or production is material, and that such person has,
without lawful excuse, failed to attend or to produce the
document in compliance with such summons or has
intentionally avoided service, it may issue a proclamation
requiring him to attend to give evidence or to produce the
document at a time and place to be named therein; and a copy of
such proclamation shall be affixed on the outer door or other
conspicuous part of the house in which he ordinarily resides.
.
(3) In lieu of or at the time of issuing such
proclamation, or at any time afterwards, the Court may, in
its discretion, issue a warrant, either with or without bail, for
the arrest of such person, and may make an order for the
attachment of his property to such amount as it thinks fit, not
exceeding the amount of the costs of attachment and of any
fine which may be imposed under rule 12:
Provided that no Court of Small Causes shall make an
order for the attachment of immoveable property.
If witness
appears,
attachment
may be
withdrawn
11. Where, at any time after the attachment of his
property, such person appears and satisfies the Court,-
(a) that he did not, without lawful excuse, fail to
comply with the summons or intentionally avoid
service; and
(b) where he has failed to attend at the time and place
named in a proclamation issued under the last
preceding rule, that he had no notice of such
proclamation in time to attend,
the Court shall direct that the property be released from
attachment, and shall make such order as to the costs of the
attachment as it thinks fit.
Procedure if
witness fails
to appear
12. The Court may, where such person does not
appear, or appears but fails so to satisfy the Court, impose
upon him such fine not exceeding five hundred Taka as it
thinks fit, having regard to his condition in life and all the
circumstances of the case, and may order his property, or
any part thereof, to be attached and sold or, if already
attached under rule 10, to be sold for the purpose of
satisfying all costs of such attachment, together with the
amount of the said fine, if any:
Provided that, if the person whose attendance is
required pays into Court the costs and fine aforesaid, the
Court shall order the property to be released from
attachment.
Mode of
attachment
13. The provisions with regard to the attachment and
sale property in the execution of a decree shall, so far as
they are applicable, be deemed to apply to any attachment
and sale under this Order as if the person whose property is
so attached were a judgment-debtor.
Court may of its
own accord
14. Subject to the provisions of this Code as to
attendance and appearance and to any law for the time being
.
in force, whether the Court at any time thinks it necessary to
examine any person other than a party to the suit and not called
as a witness by a party to the suit, the Court may, of its own
motion, cause such person to be summoned as a witness to give
evidence, or to produce any document in his possession, on a
day to be appointed, and may examine him as a witness or
require him to produce such document.
summon as
witnesses
strangers to
suit
15. Subject as last aforesaid, whoever is summoned to
appear and give evidence in a suit shall attend at the time and
place named in the summons for that purpose, and whoever is
summoned to produce a document shall either attend to produce
it, or cause it to be produced, at such time and place.
Duty of
persons
summoned to
give evidence
or produce
document
16. (1) A person so summoned and attending shall, unless
the Court otherwise directs, attend at each hearing until the suit
has been disposed of.
When they
may depart
(2) On the application of either party and the payment
through the Court of all necessary expenses (if any), the Court
may require any person so summoned and attending to furnish
security to attend at the next or any other hearing or until the
suit is disposed of and, in default of his furnishing such security,
may order him to be detained in the civil prison.
17. The provisions of rules 10 to 13 shall, so far as they
are applicable, be deemed to apply to any person who having
attended in compliance with a summons departs, without lawful
excuse, in contravention of rule 16.
Application of
rules 10 to 13
18. Where any person arrested under a warrant is brought
before the Court in custody and cannot, owing to the absence of
the parties or any of them, give the evidence or produce the
document which he has been summoned to give or produce, the
Court may require him to give reasonable bail or other security
for his appearance at such time and place as it thinks fit, and, on
such bail or security being given, may release him, and, in
default of his giving such bail or security, may order him to be
detained in the civil prison.
Procedure
where witness
apprehended
cannot give
evidence or
produce
document
19. No one shall be ordered to attend in person to give
evidence unless he resides
(a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary
original jurisdiction, or
No witness to
be ordered to
attend in
person unless
resident within
certain limits
.
(b) without such limits but at a place less than fifty or
(where there is railway or steamer communication
or other established public conveyance for fivesixths of the distance between the place where he
resides and the place where the Court is situate)
less than two hundred miles distance from the
Court-house.
Consequence
of refusal of
party to give
evidence
when called
on by Court
20. Where any party to a suit present in Court refuses,
without lawful excuse, when required by the Court, to give
evidence or to produce any document then and there in his
possession or power, the Court may pronounce judgment
against him or make such order in relation to the suit as it
thinks fit.
Rules as to
witnesses to
apply to
parties
summoned
21. Where any party to a suit is required to give evidence
or to produce a document, the provisions as to witnesses shall
apply to him so far as they are applicable.
ORDER XVII
ADJOURNMENTS
Court may
grant time and
adjourn
hearing
1. (1) The Court may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage
of the suit grant time to the parties or to any of them, and may from
time to time adjourn the hearing of the suit.
Costs of
adjournment
(2) In every such case the Court shall fix a day for the further
hearing of the suit, and may make such order as it thinks fit with
respect to the costs occasioned by the adjournment:
Provided that, when the hearing of evidence has once begun,
the hearing of the suit shall be continued from day to day until all the
witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds
the adjournment of the hearing beyond the following day to be
necessary for reasons to be recorded.
1
[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1) and
(2), the Court shall not grant more than 2
[four] adjournments in a suit
before peremptory hearing at the instance of either party to the suit,
and any adjournment granted to a party beyond the aforesaid limit
shall make such party liable to pay a cost of not less than two
hundred taka and
.

1
Sub-rules (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) were added by section 7 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Third Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003).
2
 The word “four” was substituted for the word “six” by section 12 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
not more than one thousand taka to the other party, within
time to be specified by it; noncompliance with which, by the
plaintiff shall render the suit liable to be dismissed and, by the
defendant shall render the suit liable to be disposed of ex parte:
Provided that the Court shall not grant more than three
adjournments to a party even with cost under this rule.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the
Court shall not grant any adjournment at the peremptory hearing
stage and thereafter in a suit at the instance of either party to the
suit:
Provided that if for ends of justice any adjournment is
granted to a party under this sub-rule, the Court shall direct that
party to pay a cost of not less than two hundred taka and not
more than one thousand taka to the other party, within time to be
specified by it, noncompliance with which, by the plaintiff shall
render the suit liable to be dismissed and, by the defendant shall
render the suit liable to be disposed of ex parte:
Provided further that the Court shall not grant more than
three adjournments to a party even with cost under the above
proviso.
(5) Where applications are made by both the parties for any
adjournment under sub-rule (3) or (4) and the applications are
allowed with costs, the Court shall direct each party to pay such
cost as revenue to the state.
(6) The Court shall not, of its own, order any adjournment
under this rule without recording reasons therefor.
(7) A suit dismissed or disposed of ex parte under sub-rule
(3) or (4) shall not be revived for hearing unless the party, for
whose noncompliance the suit was dismissed or disposed of ex
parte, makes within thirty days of such dismissal or ex parte
disposal, an application together with cost of two thousand taka
into Court for such revival; and upon such application being
made, the suit shall be revived for hearing without any further
proceeding; and cost deposited into Court shall be paid to the
other party.]
2. Where, on any day to which the hearing of the suit is
adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court may
Procedure if
Parties fail to
.
appear on day
fixed
proceed to dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed in that behalf
by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit.
Court may
proceed
notwithstanding
either party fails
to produce
evidence, etc.
3. Where any party to a suit to whom time has been granted fails
to produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance of his witnesses, or
to perform any other act necessary to the further progress of the suit,
for which time has been allowed, the Court may, notwithstanding such
default, proceed to decide the suit forthwith.
ORDER XVIII
HEARING OF THE SUIT AND EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
Right to begin 1. The plaintiff has the right to begin unless the defendant admits
the facts alleged by the plaintiff and contends that either in point of law
or on some additional facts alleged by the defendant the plaintiff is not
entitled to any part of the relief which he seeks, in which case the
defendant has the right to begin.
Statement and
production of
evidence
2. (1) On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit or on any other
day to which the hearing is adjourned, the party having the right to
begin shall state his case and produce his evidence in support of the
issues which he is bound to prove.
(2) The other party shall then state his cause and produce his
evidence (if any) and may then address the Court generally on the
whole case.
(3) The party beginning may then reply generally on the whole
case.
Evidence where
several issues
3. Where there are several issues, the burden of proving some of
which lies on the other party, the party beginning may, at his option,
either produce his evidence on those issues or reserve it by way of
answer to the evidence produced by the other party; and, in the latter
case, the party beginning may produce evidence on those issues after
the other party has produced all his evidence, and the other party may
then reply specially on the evidence so produced by the party
beginning; but the party beginning will then be entitled to reply
generally on the whole case.
Witnesses to be
examined in
open Court
 4. The evidence of the witnesses in attendance shall be taken orally
in open Court in the presence and under the personal direction and
superintendence of the Judge.
Examination-inchief on affidavit
and admissibility
of documents

1
[4A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or the
Evidence Act, 1872 (Act No. 1 of 1872), the facts stated in the plaint
or written statement shall not be required to be orally stated or denied
by the plaintiff or the defendant, as the case may be, and in every .

1
 Rule 4A was inserted by section 13(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
case, the examination-in-chief of the plaintiff or the defendant, as the
case may be, shall be on affidavit and he may then be cross-examined
and, if necessary, re-examined:
 Provided that a copy of such affidavit shall be supplied to the
other party before being furnished to the Court:
 Provided further that where documents are filed along with the
affidavit and the parties rely upon such documents, the proof and
admissibility of those documents shall be subject to the orders of the
Court.]
5. In cases in which an appeal is allowed the evidence of each
witness shall be taken down in writing, in the language of the Court, by or
in the presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of
the Judge, not ordinarily in the form of question and answer, but in that of
a narrative, and, when completed, shall be read over in the presence of the
Judge and of the witness, and the Judge shall, if necessary, correct the
same, and shall sign it.
How evidence
shall be taken
in appealable
cases
6. Where the evidence is taken down in a language different from
that in which it is given, and the witness does not understand the language
in which it is taken down, the evidence as taken down in writing shall be
interpreted to him in the language in which it is given.
When
deposition to be
interpreted
7. Evidence taken down under section 138 shall be in the form
prescribed by rule 5 and shall be read over and signed and, as occasion
may require, interpreted and corrected as if it were evidence taken down
under that rule.
Evidence under
section 138
8. Where the evidence is not taken down in writing by the Judge, he
shall be bound, as the examination of each witness proceeds, to make a
memorandum of the substance of what each witness deposes, and such
memorandum shall be written and signed by the Judge and shall form part
of the record.
Memorandum
when evidence
not taken down
by Judge
9. Where English is not the language of the Court, but all the parties
to the suit who appear in person, and the pleaders of such as appear by
pleaders, do not object to have such evidence as is given in English taken
down in English, the Judge may so take it down.
When evidence
may be taken in
English
10. The Court may, of its own motion or on the application of any
party or his pleader, take down any particular question and answer, or any
objection to any question, if there appears to be any special reason for so
doing.
Any particular
question and
answer may be
taken down
11. Where any question put to a witness is objected to by a party or
his pleader, and the Court allows the same to be put, the judge shall take
down the question, the answer, the objection and the name of the person
making it, together with the decision of the Court thereon.
Questions
objected to and
allowed by
Court
.
Remarks on
demeanour of
witnesses
12. The Court may record such remarks as it thinks material
respecting the demeanour of any witness while under examination.
Memorandum of
evidence in
unappealable
cases
13. In cases in which an appeal is not allowed, it shall not be
necessary to take down the evidence of the witnesses in writing at
length; but the Judge, as the examination of each witness proceeds,
shall make a memorandum of the substance of what he disposes, and
such memorandum shall be written and signed by the Judge and shall
form part of the record.
Judge unable to
make such
memorandum to
record reasons of
his inability
14. (1) Where the Judge is unable to make a memorandum as
required by this Order, he shall cause the reason of such inability to be
recorded, and shall cause the memorandum to be made in writing from
his dictation in open Court.
(2) Every memorandum so made shall form part of the record.
Power to deal
with evidence
taken before
another Judge
15. (1) Where a Judge is prevented by death, transfer or other
cause from concluding the trial of a suit, his successor may deal with
any evidence or memorandum taken down or made under the foregoing
rules as if such evidence or memorandum had been taken down or
made by him or under his direction under the said rules and may
proceed with the suit from the stage at which his predecessor left it.
(2) The provisions of sub-rule (1) shall, so far as they are
applicable, be deemed to apply to evidence taken in a suit transferred
under section 24.
Power to
examine witness
immediately
16. (1) Where a witness is about to leave the jurisdiction of the
Court, or other sufficient cause is shown to the satisfaction of the Court
why his evidence should be taken immediately, the Court may, upon
the application of any party or of the witness, at any time after the
institution of the suit, take the evidence of such witness in manner
hereinbefore provided.
(2) Where such evidence is not taken forthwith and in the
presence of the parties, such notice as the Court thinks sufficient, of the
day fixed for the examination, shall be given to the parties.
 (3) The evidence so taken shall be read over to the witness, and,
if he admits it to be correct, shall be signed by him, and the Judge
shall, if necessary, correct the same, and shall sign it, and it may then
be read at any hearing of the suit.
Court may recall 17. The Court may at any stage of a suit recall any witness who
.
has been examined and may (subject to the law of evidence for the
time being in force) put such questions to him as the Court thinks fit.
and examine
witness
18. The Court may at any stage of a suit inspect any property or
thing concerning which any question may arise.
Power of Court
to inspect
1
[19. (1) The Court shall complete the hearing of a suit within
one hundred and twenty days from the date fixed for its final hearing.
Time for
completion of
hearing
(2) In this rule, in determining the time, only the working days
shall be counted.]
2
[20.Court shall not fix, more than 3
[ten] suits, including 4
[four]
part-heard suits, in the daily cause list for peremptory hearing, and
more than 5
[two hundred] suits in the peremptory stage; and when
upon disposal, the total number of suits in the peremptory stage comes
down to less than 6
[one hundred forty], the Court shall then bring in
more suits in the peremptory stage, generally in the order of dates of
institution of suits:
Fixation of suits
in the daily
cause list, etc
Provided that if in any Court, the number of suits made ready for
hearing is not sufficient for fixation in the manner as aforesaid, it shall
be in the discretion of the Court to make the fixation in a reasonable
manner.
Explanation.In this rule the word "peremptory" shall have the
meaning with reference to the word used in Civil Rules and Orders.]

1 Rule 19 was added by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
2 Rule 20 was added by section 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment)
Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003).
3
 The word “ten” was substituted for the word “five” by section 13(b) of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
4
 The word “four” was substituted for the word “two” by section 13(b) of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
5
 The words “two hundred” were substituted for the words “one hundred” by section
13(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No.
XVIII of 2025).
6
 The words “one hundred forty” were substituted for the word “seventy” by section
13(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No.
XVIII of 2025).
ORDER XIX
AFFIDAVITS
Power to order
any point to be
proved by
affidavit
1. Any Court may at any time for sufficient reason order
that any particular fact or facts may be proved by affidavit, or
that the affidavit of any witness may be read at the hearing, on
such conditions as the Court thinks reasonable:
Provided that where it appears to the Court that either
party bona fide desires the production of a witness for crossexamination, and that such witness can be produced, and order
shall not be made authorizing the evidence of such witness to be
given by affidavit.
Power to order
attendance of
deponent for
crossexamination
2. (1) Upon any application evidence may be given by
affidavit, but the Court may, at the instance of either party,
order the attendance for cross-examination of the deponent.
(2) Such attendance shall be in Court, unless the deponent
is exempted from personal appearance in Court, or the Court
otherwise directs.
Matters to which
affidavits shall
be confined
3. (1) Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as the
deponent is able of his own knowledge to prove, except on
interlocutory applications, on which statements of his belief
may be admitted: provided that the grounds thereof are stated.
(2) The costs of every affidavit which shall unnecessarily
set forth matters of hearsay or argumentative matter, or copies
of or extracts from documents, shall (unless the Court otherwise
directs) be paid by the party filing the same.
ORDER XX
JUDGMENT AND DECREE
Judgment when
pronounced
1. The Court, after the case has been heard, shall
pronounce judgment in open Court, either at once or on some
future day, 1
[not beyond seven days,] of which due notice shall
be given to the parties or their pleaders.
.

1 The words and comma "not beyond seven days," were inserted by section 5 of the
Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
2. A Judge may pronounce a judgment written but not
pronounced by his predecessor.
Power to
pronounce
Judgment written
by Judge's
predecessor
3. The Judgment shall be dated and signed by the Judge in
open Court at the time of pronouncing it and, when once signed,
shall not afterwards be altered or added to, save as provided by
section 152 or on review.
Judgment to be
signed
4. (1) Judgments of a Court of Small Causes need not
contain more than the points for determination and the decision
thereon.
Judgments of
Small Cause
Courts
(2) Judgments of other Courts shall contain a concise
statement of the case, the points for determination, the decision
thereon, and the reasons for such decision.
Judgments of
other Courts
5. In suits in which issues have been framed, the Court
shall state its finding or decision, with the reasons therefor,
upon each separate issue 1
[* * *].
Court to state its
decision on each
issue
2
[5A. The decree shall be drawn up within seven days
from the date of pronouncement of the judgment.]
Time for drawn
up a decree
6. (1) The decree shall agree with the judgment; it shall
contain the number of the suit, the names and descriptions of
the parties, and particulars of the claim, and shall specify
clearly the relief granted or other determination of the suit.
Contents of
decree
(2) The decree shall also state the amount of costs
incurred in the suit, and by whom or out of what property and in
what proportions such costs are to be paid.
(3) The Court may direct that the costs payable to one
party by the other shall be set-off against any sum which is
admitted or found to be due from the former to the latter.
.

1 The comma and words ", unless the finding upon any one or more of the issues is
sufficient for the decision of the suit" were omitted by section 5 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
2 Rule 5A was inserted by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Date of decree 7. The decree shall bear date the day on which the
judgment was pronounced, and, when the Judge has satisfied
himself that the decree has been drawn up in accordance with
the judgment, he shall sign the decree.
Procedure where
Judge has
vacated office
before signing
decree
8. Where a Judge has vacated office after pronouncing
judgment but without signing the decree, a decree drawn up in
accordance with such judgment may be signed by his successor
or, if the Court has ceased to exist, by the Judge of any Court to
which such Court was subordinate.
Decree for
recovery of
immoveable
property
9. Where the subject-matter of the suit is immoveable
property, the decree shall contain a description of such property
sufficient to identify the same, and where such property can be
identified by boundaries or by numbers in a record of settlement
or survey, the decree shall specify such boundaries or numbers.
Decree for
delivery of
moveable
property
10. Where the suit is for moveable property, and the
decree is for the delivery of such property, the decree shall also
state the amount of money to be paid as an alternative if
delivery cannot be had.
Decree may
direct payment
by instalments
11. (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment
of money, the Court may for any sufficient reason at the time of
passing the decree order that payment of the amount decreed
shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments, with or
without interest, notwithstanding anything contained in the
contract under which the money is payable.
Order, after
decree, for
payment by
instalments
(2) After the passing of any such decree the Court may, on
the application of the Judgment-debtor and with the consent of
the decree-holder, order that payment of the amount decreed
shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments on such
terms as to the payment of interest, the attachment of the
property of the judgment-debtor, or the taking of security from
him, or otherwise, as it thinks fit.
.
12. (1) Where a suit is for the recovery of possession of
immoveable property and for rent or mesne profits, the Court
may pass a decreeDecree for
possession and
mesne profits
(a) for the possession of the property;
(b) for the rent or mesne profits which have accrued on the
property during a period prior to the institution of the
suit or directing an inquiry as to such rent or mesne
profits;
(c) directing an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits from the
institution of the suit until
(i) the delivery of possession to the decree-holder,
(ii) the relinquishment of possession by the judgmentdebtor with notice to the decree-holder through
the Court, or
(iii) the expiration of three years from the date of the
decree, whichever event first occurs.
(2) Where an inquiry is directed under clause (b) or clause
(c), a final decree in respect of the rent or mesne profits shall be
passed in accordance with the result of such inquiry.
13. (1) Where a suit is for an account of any property and
for its due administration under the decree of the Court, the
Court shall, before passing the final decree, pass a preliminary
decree, ordering such accounts and inquiries to be taken and
made, and giving such other directions as it thinks fit.
Decree in
administration
suit
(2) In the administration by the Court of the property of
any deceased person, if such property proves to be insufficient
for the payment in full of his debts and liabilities, the same rules
shall be observed as to the respective rights of secured and
unsecured creditors and as to debts and liabilities provable, and
as to the valuation of annuities and future and contingent
liabilities respectively, as may be in force for the time being,
within the local limits of the Court in which the administration
suit is pending with respect to the estates of persons adjudged or
declared insolvent; and all persons who in any such case would
be entitled to be paid out of such property, may come in under
the preliminary decree, and make such claims against the same
as they may respectively be entitled to by virtue of this Code.
.
Decree in preemption-suit
14. (1) Where the Court decrees a claim to pre-emption
in respect of a particular sale of property and the purchasemoney has not been paid into Court, the decree shall
(a) specify a day on or before which the purchase-money
shall be so paid, and
(b) direct that on payment into Court of such purchasemoney, together with the costs (if any) decreed against
the plaintiff, on or before the day referred to in clause
(a), the defendant shall deliver possession of the
property to the plaintiff, whose title thereto shall be
deemed to have accrued from the date of such
payment, but that, if the purchase-money and the costs
(if any) are not so paid, the suit shall be dismissed
with costs.
(2) Where the Court has adjudicated upon rival claims to
pre-emption, the decree shall direct,
(a) if and in so far as the claims decreed are equal in
degree, that the claim of each pre-emptor complying
with the provisions of sub-rule (1) shall take effect in
respect of a proportionate share of the property
including any proportionate share in respect of which
the claim of any pre-emptor failing to comply with the
said provisions would, but for such default, have taken
effect; and
(b) if and in so far as the claims decreed are different in
degree, that the claim of the inferior pre-emptor shall
not take effect unless and until the superior pre-emptor
has failed to comply with the said provisions.
Decree in suit
for
dissolution of
partnership
15. Where a suit is for the dissolution of a partnership,
or the taking of partnership accounts, the Court, before
passing a final decree, may pass a preliminary decree
declaring the proportionate shares of the parties, fixing the day
on which the partnership shall stand dissolved or be deemed to
have been dissolved, and directing such accounts to be taken,
and other acts to be done, as it thinks fit.
.
16. In a suit for an account of pecuniary transactions
between a principal and an agent, and in any other suit not
hereinbefore provided for, where it is necessary, in order to
ascertain the amount of money due to or from any party, that an
account should be taken, the Court shall, before passing its final
decree, pass a preliminary decree directing such accounts to be
taken as it thinks fit.
Decree in suit
for account
between
principal and
agent
17. The Court may either by the decree directing an
account to be taken or by any subsequent order give special
directions with regard to the mode in which the account is to be
taken or vouched and in particular may direct that in taking the
account the books of account in which the accounts in question
have been kept shall be taken as prima facie evidence of the
truth of the matters therein contained with liberty to the parties
interested to take such objection thereto as they may be advised.
Special
directions as to
accounts
18. Where the Court passes a decree for the partition of
property or for the separate possession of a share therein, then,
(1) if and in so far as the decree relates to an estate
assessed to the payment of revenue to the
Government, the decree shall declare the rights of
the several parties interested in the property, but
shall direct such partition or separation to be
made by the Collector, or any 1
[Gazetted officer
subordinate to] the Collector deputed by him in
this behalf, in accordance with such declaration
and with the provisions of section 54;
Decree in suit
for partition of
property or
separate
possession of a
share therein
(2) if and in so far as such decree relates to any
other immoveable property or to moveable
property, the Court may, if partition or
separation cannot be conveniently made without
further inquiry, pass a preliminary decree
declaring the rights of the several parties
interested in the property and giving such further
directions as may be required.

1 The words "Gazetted officer subordinate to" were substituted, for the words "Gazetted
subordinate of" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and
Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
.
Decree when
set-off is
allowed
19. (1) Where the defendant has been allowed a set-off
against the claim of the plaintiff, the decree shall state what
amount is due to the plaintiff and what amount is due to the
defendant, and shall be for the recovery of any sum which
appears to be due to either party.
Appeal from
decree
relating to setoff
(2) Any decree passed in suit in which a set-off is
claimed shall be subject to the same provisions in respect of
appeal to which it would have been subject if no set-off had
been claimed.
(3) The provisions of this rule shall apply whether the
set-off is admissible under rule 6 of Order VIII or otherwise.
Certified
copies of
judgment and
decree to be
furnished
20. Certified copies of the judgment and decree shall be
furnished to the parties on application to the Court, and at
their expense.
ORDER XXI
EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDERS
Payment under Decree
Modes of
paying money
under decree
1. (1) All money payable under a decree shall be paid as
follows, namely:
(a) into the Court whose duty it is to execute the
decree; or
(b) out of Court to the decree-holder; or
(c) otherwise as the Court which made the decree
directs.
(2) where any payment is made under clause (a) of subrule (1), notice of such payment shall be given to the decreeholder.
Payment out
of Court to
decree-holder
2. (1) Where any money payable under a decree of any
kind is paid out of Court, or the decree is otherwise adjusted
in whole or in part to the satisfaction of the decree-holder, the
decree-holder shall certify such payment or adjustment to the
Court whose duty it is to execute the decree, and the Court
shall record the same accordingly.
.
(2) The judgment-debtor also may inform the Court of
such payment or adjustment, and apply to the Court to issue a
notice to the decree-holder to show cause, on a day to be fixed
by the Court, why such payment or adjustment should not be
recorded as certified; and if, after service of such notice, the
decree-holder fails to show cause why the payment or
adjustment should not be recorded as certified, the Court shall
record the same accordingly.
(3) A payment or adjustment, which has not been certified
or recorded as aforesaid, shall not be recognized by any Court
executing the decree.
Courts Executing Decrees
3. Where immoveable property forms one estate or tenure
situate within the local limits of the jurisdiction of two or more
Courts, any one of such Courts may attach and sell the entire
estate or tenure.
Lands situate
in more than
one
jurisdiction
4. [Omitted by the Adaptation of Central Acts and
Ordinances Order, 1949.]
5. Where the Court to which a decree is to be sent for
execution is situate within the same district as the Court which
passed such decree, such Court shall send the same directly to
the former Court. But, where the Court to which the decree is to
be sent for execution is situate in a different district, the Court
which passed it shall send it to the District Court of the district
in which the decree is to be executed.
Mode of
transfer
6. The Court sending a decree for execution shall send
(a) a copy of the decree;
(b) a certificate setting forth that satisfaction of the
decree has not been obtained by execution within
the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed,
or, where the decree has been executed in part, the
extent to which satisfaction has been obtained and
what part of the decree remains unsatisfied; and
(c) a copy of any order for the execution of the decree,
or, if no such order has been made, a certificate to
that effect.
Procedure
where Court
desires that its
own decree
shall be
executed by
another Court
.
Court
receiving
copies of
decree, etc.,
to file same
without proof
7. The Court to which a decree is so sent shall cause
such copies and certificate to be filed, without any further
proof of the decree or order for execution, or of the copies
thereof, unless the Court, for any special reasons to be
recorded under the hand of the Judge, requires such proof.
Execution of
decree or
order by court
to which it is
sent
8. Where such copies are so filed, the decree or order
may, if the Court to which it is sent is the District Court, be
executed by such Court or be transferred for execution to
any subordinate Court of competent jurisdiction.
Execution by
High Court
Division of
decree
transferred by
other Court
9. Where the Court to which the decree is sent for
execution is the High Court Division, the decree shall be
executed by such Court in the same manner as if it had been
passed by such Court in the exercise of its ordinary original
civil jurisdiction.
Application for Execution
Application
for execution
10. Where the holder of a decree desires to execute it,
he shall apply to the Court which passed the decree or to the
officer (if any) appointed in this behalf, or if the decree has
been sent under the provisions hereinbefore contained to
another Court then to such Court or to the proper officer
thereof.
Oral
application
11. (1) Where a decree is for the payment of money the
Court may, on the oral application of the decree-holder at
the time of the passing of the decree, order immediate
execution thereof by the arrest of the judgment-debtor, prior
to the preparation of a warrant if he is within the precincts of
the Court.
Written
application
(2) Save as otherwise provided by sub-rule (1), every
application for the execution of a decree shall be in writing,
signed and verified by the applicant or by some other person
proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with
the facts of the case, and shall contain in a tabular form the
following particulars, namely:
(a) the number of the suit;
(b) the names of the parties;
.
(c) the date of the decree;
(d) whether any appeal has been preferred from the decree;
(e) whether any, and (if any) what, payment or other
adjustment of the matter in controversy has been made
between the parties subsequently to the decree;
(f) whether any, and (if any) what, previous applications
have been made for the execution of the decree, the
dates of such applications and their results;
(g) the amount with interest (if any) due upon the decree, or
other relief granted thereby, together with particulars of
any cross-decree, whether passed before or after the
date of the decree sought to be executed;
(h) the amount of the costs (if any) awarded;
(i) the name of the person against whom execution of the
decree is sought; and
(j) the mode in which the assistance of the Court is
required, whether
(i) by the delivery of any property specifically
decreed;
(ii) by the attachment and sale, or by the sale without
attachment, of any property;
(iii) by the arrest and detention in prison of any
person;
(iv) by the appointment of a receiver;
(v) otherwise, as the nature of the relief granted may
require.
(3) The Court to which an application is made under subrule (2) may require the applicant to produce a certified copy of
the decree.
12. Where an application is made for the attachment of
any moveable property belonging to a judgment-debtor but not
in his possession, the decree-holder shall annex to the
application an inventory of the property to be attached,
containing a reasonably accurate description of the same.
Application
for attachment
of moveable
property not in
judgmentdebtor's
possession .
Application
for attachment
of
immoveable
property to
contain
certain
particulars
13. Where an application is made for the attachment of
any immoveable property belonging to a judgment-debtor, it
shall contain at the foot
(a) a description of such property sufficient to identify the
same and, in case such property can be identified by
boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or
survey, a specification of such boundaries or numbers;
and
(b) a specification of the judgment-debtor's share or
interest in such property to the best of the belief of the
applicant, and so far as he has been able to ascertain
the same.
Power to
require
certified
extract from
Collector's
register in
certain cases
14. Where an application is made for the attachment of
any land which is registered in the office of the Collector, the
Court may require the applicant to produce a certified extract
from the register of such office, specifying the persons
registered as proprietors of, or as possessing any transferable
interest in, the land or its revenue, or as liable to pay revenue
for the land and the shares of the registered proprietors.
Application
for execution
by joint
decree-holder
15. (1) Where a decree has been passed jointly in favour
of more persons than one, any one or more of such persons
may, unless the decree imposes any condition to the contrary,
apply for the execution of the whole decree for the benefit of
them all, or, where any of them has died, for the benefit of the
survivors and the legal representatives of the deceased.
(2) Where the Court sees sufficient cause for allowing
the decree to be executed on an application made under this
rule, it shall make such order as it deems necessary for
protecting the interests of the persons who have not joined in
the application.
Application
for execution
by transferee
of decree
16. Where a decree or, if a decree has been passed
jointly in favour of two or more persons, the interest of any
decree-holder in the decree is transferred by assignment in
writing or by operation of law, the transferee may apply for
execution of the decree to the Court which passed it; and the
decree may be executed in the same manner and subject to the
.
same conditions as if the application were made by such decreeholder:
Provided that, where the decree, or such interest as
aforesaid, has been transferred by assignment, notice of such
application shall be given to the transferor and the judgmentdebtor, and the decree shall not be executed until the Court has
heard their objections (if any) to its execution:
Provided also that, where a decree for the payment of
money against two or more persons has been transferred to one
of them, it shall not be executed against the others.
17. (1) On receiving an application for the execution of a
decree as provided by rule 11, sub-rule (2), the Court shall
ascertain whether such of the requirements of rules 11 to 14 as
may be applicable to the case have been complied with; and, if
they have not been complied with, the Court may reject the
application, or may allow the defect to be remedied then and
there or within a time to be fixed by it.
Procedure on
receiving
application for
execution of
decree
(2) where an application is amended under the provisions
of sub-rule (1), it shall be deemed to have been an application in
accordance with law and presented on the date when it was first
presented.
(3) Every amendment made under this rule shall be signed
or initialled by the Judge.
(4) When the application is admitted, the Court shall enter
in the proper register a note of the application and the date on
which it was made, and shall, subject to the provisions
hereinafter contained, order execution of the decree according
to the nature of the application:
Provided that, in the case of a decree for the payment of
money, the value of the property attached shall, as nearly as
may be, correspond with the amount due under the decree.
18. (1) Where applications are made to a Court for the
execution of cross-decrees in separate suits for the payment of
two sums of money passed between the same parties and
capable of execution at the same time by such Court, then
Execution in
case of cross
decrees
(a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction shall be
.
 entered upon both decrees; and
(b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken
out only by the holder of the decree for the larger sum
and for so much only as remains after deducting the
smaller sum, and satisfaction for the smaller sum shall
be entered on the decree for the larger sum as well as
satisfaction of the decree for the smaller sum.
(2) This rule shall be deemed to apply where either
party is an assignee of one of the decrees and as well in respect
of judgment-debts due by the original assignor as in respect of
judgment-debts due by the assignee himself.
(3) This rule shall not be deemed to apply unless
(a) the decree-holder in one of the suits in which the
decrees have been made is the judgment-debtor in the
other and each party fills the same character in both
suits; and
(b) the sums due under the decrees are definite.
(4) The holder of a decree passed against several persons
jointly and severally may treat it as a cross-decree in relation to
a decree passed against him singly in favour of one or more of
such persons.
Illustrations
(a) A holds a decree against B for Taka 1,000. B holds a decree
against A for the payment of Taka 1,000 in case A fails to deliver
certain goods at a future day. B cannot treat his decree as a crossdecree under this rule.
(b) A and B, co-plaintiffs, obtain a decree for Taka 1,000
against C, and C obtains a decree for Taka 1,000 against B. C cannot
treat his decree as a cross-decree under this rule.
(c) A obtains a decree against B for Taka 1,000. C who is a
trustee for B, obtains a decree on behalf of B against A for Taka
1,000. B cannot treat C's decree as a cross-decree under this rule.
(d) A, B, C, D and E are jointly and severally liable for Taka
1,000 under a decree obtained by F. A obtains a decree for Taka 100
against F singly and applies for execution to the Court in which the
joint-decree is being executed. F may treat his joint-decree as a crossdecree under this rule.
.
19. Where application is made to a Court for the execution
of a decree under which two parties are entitled to recover sums
of money from each other, then
Execution in
case of crossclaims under
same decree
(a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction for both shall be
entered upon the decree; and,
(b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken out
only by the party entitled to the larger sum and for so
much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum,
and satisfaction for the smaller sum shall be entered
upon the decree.
20. The provisions contained in rules 18 and 19 shall
apply to decrees for sale in enforcement of a mortgage or
charge.
Cross-decrees
and crossclaims in
mortgage-suits
21. The Court may, in its discretion, refuse execution at
the same time against the person and property of the judgmentdebtor.
Simultaneous
execution
22. (1) Where an application for execution is made
(a) more than 1
[two years] after the date of the decree,
or
(b) against the legal representative of a party to the
decree,
Notice to show
cause against
execution in
certain cases
or where an application is made for execution of a decree filed
under the provisions of section 44A, the Court executing the
decree shall issue a notice to the person against whom execution
is applied for requiring him to show cause, on a date to be fixed,
why the decree should not be executed against him:
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary in
consequence of more than 1
[two years] having elapsed between
the date of the decree and the application for execution if the
application is made within 1
[two years] from the date of the last
order against the party against whom execution is applied for,
made on any previous application for execution, or in
consequence of the application being made against the legal
representative of the judgment-debtor, if upon a previous
application for execution against the same person the Court has
ordered execution to issue against him.
.

1 The words "two years" were substituted, for the words "one year" by section 5 of the Code
of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
(2) Nothing in the foregoing sub-rule shall be deemed to
preclude the Court from issuing any process in execution of a
decree without issuing the notice thereby prescribed, if, for
reasons to be recorded, it considers that the issue of such notice
would cause unreasonable delay or would defeat the ends of
justice.
1
[(3) No order of execution of the decree shall be invalid
by reason of the omission to issue a notice under sub-rule (1) or
to record reasons in a case where notice is dispensed with
under sub-rule (2) unless the judgment-debtor has sustained
substantial injury by reason of such omission.]
Procedure
after issue of
notice
23. (1) Where the person to whom notice is issued under
the last preceding rule does not appear or does not show cause
to the satisfaction of the Court why the decree should not be
executed, the Court shall order the decree to be executed.
(2) Where such person offers any objection to the
execution of the decree, the Court shall consider such objection
and make such order as it thinks fit.
Process for Execution
Process for
execution
24. (1) When the preliminary measures (if any) required
by the foregoing rules have been taken, the Court shall, unless
it sees cause to the contrary, issue its process for the execution
of the decree.
(2) Every such process shall bear date the day on which it
is issued, and shall be signed by the Judge or such officer as the
Court may appoint in this behalf, and shall be sealed with the
seal of the Court and delivered to the proper officer to be
executed.
(3) In every such process a day shall be specified on or
before which it shall be executed.
Endorsement
on process
25. (1) The officer entrusted with the execution of the
process shall endorse thereon the day on, and the manner in, which
it was executed, and, if the latest day specified in the process for
the return thereof has been exceeded, the reason of the delay, or, if
it was not executed, the reason why it was not executed, and shall
return the process with such endorsement to the Court.
.

1
Sub-rule (3) was added by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
(2) Where the endorsement is to the effect that such
officer is unable to execute the process, the Court shall examine
him touching his alleged inability, and may, if it thinks fit,
summon and examine witnesses as to such inability, and shall
record the result.
Stay of Execution
26. (1) The Court to which a decree has been sent for
execution shall, upon sufficient cause being shown, stay the
execution of such decree for a reasonable time, to enable the
judgment-debtor to apply to the Court by which the decree was
passed, or to any Court having appellate jurisdiction in respect
of the decree or the execution thereof, for an order to stay
execution, or for any other order relating to the decree or
execution which might have been made by such Court of first
instance or appellate Court if execution had been issued
thereby, or if application for execution had been made thereto.
When Court
may stay
execution
(2) Where the property or person of the judgment-debtor
has been seized under an execution the Court which issued the
execution may order the restitution of such property or the
discharge of such person pending the result of the application.
(3) Before making an order to stay execution or for the
restitution of property or the discharge of the judgment-debtor,
the Court may require such security from, or impose such
conditions upon, the judgment-debtor as it thinks fit.
Power to
require
security from,
or impose
conditions
upon,
judgmentdebtor
27. No order of restitution or discharge under rule 26 shall
prevent the property or person of a judgment-debtor from being
retaken in execution of the decree sent for execution.
Liability of
judgmentdebtor
discharged
28. Any order of the Court by which the decree was
passed, or of such Court of appeal as aforesaid, in relation to the
execution of such decree, shall be binding upon the Court to
which the decree was sent for execution.
Order of Court
which passed
decree or of
appellate
Court to be
binding upon
Court applied
to .
Stay of
execution
pending suit
between
decree-holder
and judgmentdebtor
29. Where a suit is pending in any Court against the
holder of a decree of such Court, on the part of the person
against whom the decree was passed, the Court may, on such
terms as to security or otherwise, as it thinks fit, stay
execution of the decree until the pending suit has been
decided.
Mode of Execution
Decree for
payment of
money
30. Every decree for the payment of money, including a
decree for the payment of money as the alternative to some
other relief, may be executed by the detention in the civil
prison of the judgment-debtor, or by the attachment and sale
of his property, or by both.
Special
provisions
for
execution of
decree for
payment of
money

1
[30A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Code, the Court may, on the application of the decreeholder, detain the judgment-debtor in the civil prison for the
whole or any part of the decretal amount remaining unpaid,
for a term not exceeding six months or until payment is
made, whichever is earlier.
 (2) The expense incurred for subsistence of the
judgment-debtor detained in a civil prison under this Code
shall be borne by the Government.
 (3) The provision of detention in the civil prison shall
not apply to a judgment-debtor who is a minor or of unsound
mind or who has been declared as insolvent by a competent
Court or who has been substituted as successor to the
original judgment-debtor by inheritance.
 (4) If the judgment-debtor in the civil prison deposits not
less than 25% of the decretal amount together with a bond
for payment of the remaining amount within 60 days, the
Court shall release him and if the judgment-debtor fails to
pay the remaining decretal amount as per the conditions
stated in the bond, he shall be liable to be re-arrested and
detained further in the civil prison which may extend to six
months.
 (5) If a judgment-debtor is detained for the entire term in
.

1
 Rule 30A was inserted by section 14(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
the civil prison under sub-rule (1) or (4), he shall not be rearrested or detained further in the civil prison in the same
execution proceeding or in any other execution proceeding
arising from the same decree.
 (6) If a judgment-debtor is detained in the civil prison under
this rule for the whole or any part of the term of civil detention,
he shall not be exempted from paying the unpaid amount of the
decree.]
31. (1) Where the decree is for any specific moveable, or
for any share in a specific moveable, it may be executed by the
seizure, if practicable, of the moveable or share, and by the
delivery thereof to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to
such person as he appoints to receive delivery on his behalf, or
by the detention in the civil prison of the judgment-debtor, or by
the attachment of his property, or by both.
(2) Where any attachment under sub-rule (1) has remained
in force for six months, if the judgment-debtor has not obeyed
the decree and the decree-holder has applied to have the
attached property sold, such property may be sold, and out of
the proceeds the Court may award to the decree-holder, in cases
where any amount has been fixed by the decree to be paid as an
alternative to delivery of moveable property, such amount, and,
in other cases, such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay
the balance (if any) to the judgment-debtor on his application.
(3) Where the judgment-debtor has obeyed the decree and
paid all costs of executing the same which he is bound to pay, or
where, at the end of six months from the date of the attachment,
no application to have the property sold has been made, or, if
made, has been refused, the attachment shall cease.
Decree for
specific
moveable
property
 32. (1) Where the party against whom a decree for the
specific performance of a contract, or for restitution of conjugal
rights, or for an injunction, has been passed, has had an
opportunity of obeying the decree and has wilfully failed to
obey it, the decree may be enforced in the case of a decree for
restitution of conjugal rights by the attachment of his property
or, in the case of a decree to the specific performance of a
contract or for an injunction by his detention in the civil prison,
or by the attachment of his property, or by both.
Decree for
specific
performance,
for restitution
of conjugal
rights, or for
an injunction
(2) Where the party against whom a decree for specific
.
performance or for an injunction has been passed is a corporation,
the decree may be enforced by the attachment of the property of the
corporation or, with the leave of the Court, by the detention in the
civil prison of the directors or other principal officers thereof, or by
both attachment and detention.
(3) Where any attachment under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) has
remained in force for one year, if the judgment-debtor has not obeyed
the decree and the decree-holder has applied to have the attached
property sold, such property may be sold; and out of the proceeds the
Court may award to the decree-holder such compensation as it thinks
fit, and shall pay the balance (if any) to the judgment-debtor on his
application.
(4) Where the judgment-debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all
costs of executing the same which he is bound to pay, or where, at
the end of one year from the date of the attachment, no application to
have the property sold has been made, or if made has been refused,
the attachment shall cease.
(5) Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract or for
an injunction has not been obeyed, the Court may, in lieu of or in
addition to all or any of the processes aforesaid, direct that the act
required to be done may be done so far as practicable by the decreeholder or some other person appointed by the Court, at the cost of the
judgment-debtor, and upon the act being done the expenses incurred
may be ascertained in such manner as the Court may direct and may
be recovered as if they were included in the decree.
Illustration
 A, a person of little substance, erects a building which renders
uninhabitable a family mansion belonging to B. A, in spite of his
detention in prison and the attachment of his property, declines to
obey a decree obtained against him by B and directing him to remove
the building. The Court is of opinion that no sum realizable by the
sale of A's property would adequately compensate B for the
depreciation in the value of his mansion. B may apply to the Court to
remove the building and may recover the cost of such removal from
A in the execution-proceedings.
Discretion of
Court in
executing
decrees for
restitution of
conjugal rights
 33. (1) Notwithstanding anything in rule 32, the Court, either at
the time of passing a decree against a husband for the restitution of
conjugal rights or at any time afterwards, may order that the decree
shall be executed in the manner provided in this rule.
(2) Where the Court has made an order under sub-rule (1), it
may order that, in the event of the decree not being obeyed within
such period as may be fixed in this behalf, the judgment-debtor shall
make to the decree-holder such periodical payments as may be just,
and, if it thinks fit, require that the judgment-debtor shall, to its
satisfaction, secure to the decree-holder such periodical payments.
(3) The Court may from time to time vary or modify any order
made under sub-rule (2) for the periodical payment of money, either
by altering the times of payment or by increasing or diminishing the
amount, or may temporarily suspend the same as to the whole or any
part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again revive the same,
either wholly or in part as it may think just.
(4) Any money ordered to be paid under this rule may be
recovered as though it were payable under a decree for the payment
of money.
Decree for
execution of
document, or
endorsement
of negotiable
instrument
34. (1) Where a decree is for the execution of a document or
for the endorsement of a negotiable instrument and the judgmentdebtor neglects or refuses to obey the decree, the decree-holder may
prepare a draft of the document or endorsement in accordance with
the terms of the decree and deliver the same to the Court.
(2) The Court shall thereupon cause the draft to be served on
the judgment-debtor together with a notice requiring his objections
(if any) to be made within such time as the Court fixes in this behalf.
(3) Where the judgment-debtor objects to the draft, his
objections shall be stated in writing within such time, and the Court
shall make such order approving or altering the draft, as it thinks fit.
(4) The decree-holder shall deliver to the Court a copy of the
draft with such alterations (if any) as the Court may have directed
upon the proper stamp-paper if a stamp is required by the law for the
time being in force; and the Judge or such officer as may be
appointed in this behalf shall execute the documents so delivered.
 (5) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a
negotiable instrument under this rule may be in the following form,
namely:
 "C. D., Judge of the Court of
 (or as the case may be), for A. B., in a suit by E. F. against A.
B.", and shall have the same effect as the execution of the document
or the endorsement of the negotiable instrument by the party ordered
to execute or endorse the same.
.
(6) The Court, or such officer as it may appoint in this
behalf, shall cause the document to be registered if its
registration is required by the law for the time being in force or
the decree-holder desires to have it registered, and may make
such order as it thinks fit as to the payment of the expenses of
the registration.
35. (1) Where a decree is for the delivery of any
immoveable property, possession thereof shall be delivered to
the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as he
may appoint to receive delivery on his behalf, and, if necessary,
by removing any person bound by the decree who refuses to
vacate the property.
Decree for
immoveable
property
(2) Where a decree is for the joint possession of
immoveable property, such possession shall be delivered by
affixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the
property and proclaiming by beat of drum, or other customary
mode, at some convenient place, the substance of the decree.
(3) Where possession of any building or enclosure is to be
delivered and the person in possession, being bound by the
decree, does not afford free access, the Court, through its
officers, may, after giving reasonable warning and facility to
any woman not appearing in public according to the customs of
the country to withdraw, remove or open any lock or bolt or
break open any door or do any other act necessary for putting
the decree-holder in possession.
36. Where a decree is for the delivery of any immoveable
property in the occupancy of a tenant or other person entitled to
occupy the same and not bound by the decree to relinquish such
occupancy, the Court shall order delivery to be made by affixing
a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the
property, and proclaiming to the occupant by beat of drum or
other customary mode, at some convenient place, the substance
of the decree in regard to the property.
Decree for
delivery of
immoveable
property when
in occupancy
of tenant
.
Arrest and Detention in the Civil Prison
Discretionary
power to
permit
judgmentdebtor to
show cause
against
detention in
prison
37. (1) Notwithstanding anything in these rules, where
an application is for the execution of a decree for the payment
of money by arrest and detention in the civil prison of a
judgment-debtor who is liable to be arrested in pursuance of
the application, the Court shall, instead of issuing a warrant
for his arrest, issue a notice calling upon him to appear before
the Court on a day to be specified in the notice and show
cause why he should not be committed to the civil prison:
Provided that such notice shall not be necessary if the
Court is satisfied, by affidavit, or otherwise, that, with the
object or effect of delaying the execution of the decree, the
judgment-debtor is likely to abscond or leave the local limits
of the jurisdiction of the Court.
(2) Where appearance is not made in obedience to the
notice, the Court shall, if the decree-holder so requires, issue a
warrant for the arrest of the judgment-debtor.
Warrant for
arrest to
direct
judgmentdebtor to be
brought up
38. Every warrant for the arrest of a judgment-debtor
shall direct the officer entrusted with its execution to bring
him before the Court with all convenient speed, unless the
amount which he has been ordered to pay, together with the
interest thereon and the cost (if any) to which he is liable, be
sooner paid.

1
[***]

1
 Rule 39 was omitted by section 14(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
.
40. (1) When a judgment-debtor appears before the Court
in obedience to a notice issued under rule 37, or is brought
before the Court after being arrested in execution of a decree for
the payment of money, the Court shall proceed to hear the
decree-holder and take all such evidence as may be produced by
him in support of his application for execution, and shall then
give the judgment-debtor an opportunity of showing cause why
he should not be committed to the civil prison.
Proceedings
on appearance
of judgmentdebtor in
obedience to
notice or after
arrest
(2) Pending the conclusion of the inquiry under sub-rule
(1) the Court may, in its discretion, order the judgment-debtor to
be detained in the custody of an officer of the Court or release
him on his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the Court for
his appearance when required.
(3) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry under sub-rule (1)
the Court may, subject to the provisions of section 51 and to the
other provisions of this Code, make an order for the detention of
the judgment-debtor in the civil prison and shall in that event
cause him to be arrested if he is not already under arrest:
Provided that in order to give the judgment-debtor an
opportunity of satisfying the decree, the Court may, before
making the order of detention, leave the judgment-debtor in the
custody of an officer of the Court for a specified period not
exceeding fifteen days or release him on his furnishing security
to the satisfaction of the Court for his appearance at the
expiration of the specified period if the decree be not sooner
satisfied.
(4) A judgment-debtor released under this rule may be rearrested.
.
(5) When the Court does not make an order of detention
under sub-rule (3), it shall disallow the application and, if the
judgment-debtor is under arrest, direct his release.
Attachment of Property
Examination
of judgmentdebtor as to
his property
41. Where a decree is for the payment of money the
decree-holder may apply to the Court for an order that-
(a) the judgment-debtor, or
(b) in the case of a corporation, any officer thereof, or
(c) any other person,
be orally examined as to whether any or what debts are owing
to the judgment-debtor and whether the judgment-debtor has
any and what other property or means of satisfying the decree;
and the Court may make an order for the attendance and
examination of such judgment-debtor, or officer or other
person, and for the production of any books or documents.
Attachment in
case of decree
for rent or
mesne profits
or other
matter,
amount of
which to be
subsequently
determined
42. Where a decree directs an inquiry as to rent or mesne
profits or any other matter, the property of the judgmentdebtor may, before the amount due from him has been
ascertained, be attached, as in the case of an ordinary decree
for the payment of money.
Attachment of
moveable
property other
than
agricultural
produce, in
possession of
judgmentdebtor
43. Where the property to be attached is moveable
property, other than agricultural produce, in the possession of
judgment-debtor, the attachment shall be made by actual
seizure, and the attaching officer shall keep the property in his
own custody or in the custody of one of his subordinates, and
shall be responsible for the due custody thereof:
Provided that, when the property seized is subject to
speedy and natural decay, or when the expense of keeping it in
custody is likely to exceed its value, the attaching officer may
sell it at once.
Attachment of
agricultural
produce
44. Where the property to be attached is agricultural
produce, the attachment shall be made by affixing a copy of
the warrant of attachment,
(a) where such produce is a growing crop, on the land on
which such crop has grown, or
.
(b) where such produce has been cut or gathered, on the
threshing-floor or place for treading out grain or the like
or fodder-stack on or in which it is deposited,
and another copy on the outer door or on some other
conspicuous part of the house in which the judgment-debtor
ordinarily resides or, with the leave of the Court, on the outer
door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in which
he carries on business or personally works for gain or in which
he is known to have last resided or carried on business or
personally worked for gain; and the produce shall thereupon be
deemed to have passed into the possession of the Court.
45. (1) Where agricultural produce is attached, the Court
shall make such arrangements for the custody thereof as it may
deem sufficient and, for the purpose of enabling the Court to
make such arrangements, every application for the attachment
of a growing crop shall specify the time at which it is likely to
be fit to be cut or gathered.
Provisions as
to agricultural
produce under
attachment
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the
Court in this behalf either in the order of attachment or in any
subsequent order, the judgment-debtor may tend, cut, gather and
store the produce and do any other act necessary for maturing or
preserving it; and if the judgment-debtor fails to do all or any of
such acts, the decree-holder may, with the permission of the
Court and subject to the like conditions, do all or any of them
either by himself or by any person appointed by him in this
behalf, and the costs incurred by the decree-holder shall be
recoverable from the judgment-debtor as if they were included
in, or formed part of, the decree.
(3) Agricultural produce attached as a growing crop shall
not be deemed to have ceased to be under attachment or to
require re-attachment merely because it has been served from
the soil.
(4) Where an order for the attachment of a growing crop
has been made at a considerable time before the crop is likely to
be fit to be cut or gathered, the Court may suspend the execution
of the order for such time as it thinks fit, and may, in its
discretion, make a further order prohibiting the removal of the
crop pending the execution of the order of attachment.
(5) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit
of being stored shall not be attached under this rule at any time
less than twenty days before the time at which it is likely to be
fit to be cut or gathered.
.
Attachment of
debt, share
and other
property not
in possession
of judgmentdebtor
46. (1) In the case of
(a) a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument,
(b) a share in the capital of a corporation,
(c) other moveable property not in the possession of
the judgment-debtor, except property deposited in,
or in the custody of, any Court,
the attachment shall be made by a written order prohibiting,
(i) in the case of the debt, the creditor from
recovering the debt and the debtor from
making payment thereof until the further
order of the Court;
(ii) in the case of the share, the person in whose
name the share may be standing from
transferring the same or receiving any
dividend thereon;
(iii) in the case of the other moveable property
except as aforesaid, the person in
possession of the same from giving it over
to the judgment-debtor.
(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some
conspicuous part of the court-house and another copy shall be
sent in the case of the debt, to the debtor, in the case of the
share, to the proper officer of the corporation, and, in the case
of the other moveable property (except as aforesaid), to the
person in possession of the same.
(3) A debtor prohibited under clause (i) of sub-rule (1)
may pay the amount of his debt into Court, and such payment
shall discharge him as effectually as payment to the party
entitled to receive the same.
Attachment of
share in
moveables
47. Where the property to be attached consists of the
share or interest of the judgment-debtor in moveable property
belonging to him and another as co-owners, the attachment
shall be made by a notice to the judgment-debtor prohibiting
him from transferring the share or interest or charging it in any
way.
.
48. (1) Where the property to be attached is the salary or
allowances of a servant of the 1
[Republic] or of a servant of
2
[the Railway] or local authority, the Court, whether the
judgment-debtor or the disbursing officer is or is not within the
local limits of the Court's jurisdiction, may order that the
amount shall, subject to the provisions of section 60, be
withheld from such salary or allowances either in one payment
or by monthly instalments as the Court may direct; and, upon
notice of the order to such officer as the Government may by
notification in the official Gazette appoint in this behalf,
Attachment of
salary or
allowances of
public officer
or servant of
railway
company or
local authority
(a) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed
within the local limits to which this Code for the time
being extends, the officer or other person whose duty it
is to disburse the same shall withhold and remit to the
Court the amount due under the order, or the monthly
instalments, as the case may be;
(b) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed
beyond the said limits, the officer or other person within
those limits whose duty it is to instruct the disbursing
authority regarding the amount of the salary or
allowances to be disbursed shall remit to the Court the
amount due under the order, or the monthly instalments,
as the case may be, and shall direct the disbursing
authority to reduce the aggregate of the amounts from
time to time to be disbursed by the aggregate of the
amounts from time to time remitted to the Court.
(2) Where the attachment proportion of such salary or
allowances is already being withheld and remitted to a Court in
pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of attachment, the
officer appointed by the Government in this behalf shall
forthwith return the subsequent order to the Court issuing it
with a full statement of all the particulars of the existing
attachment.
.

1 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd
Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII
of 1973).
2 The words "the railway" were substituted, for the letter and words "a railway
company" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and
Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is
returned in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (2),
shall, without further notice or other process, bind the
Government or 1
[the railway] or local authority, as the case
may be, while the judgment-debtor is within the local limits to
which this Code for the time being extends and while he is
beyond those limits if he is in receipt of any salary or
allowances payable out of the revenues of the Government or
the funds of 1
[the railway] or local authority in Bangladesh;
and the Government or the 2
[the railway] or local authority, as
the case may be, shall be liable for any sum paid in
contravention of this rule.
3
[* * *]
Attachment of
partnership
property
49. (1) Save as otherwise provided by this rule, property
belonging to a partnership shall not be attached or sold in
execution of a decree other than a decree passed against the
firm or against the partners in the firm as such.
(2) The Court may, on the application of the holder of a
decree against a partner make an order charging the interest of
such partner in the partnership property and profits with
payment of the amount due under the decree, and may, by the
same or a subsequent order, appoint a receiver of the share of
such partner in the profits (whether already declared or
accruing) and of any other money which may be coming to
him in respect of the partnership, and directs accounts and
inquiries and make an order for the sale of such interest or
other orders as might have been directed or made if a charge
had been made in favour of the decree-holder by such partner,
or as the circumstances of the case may require.

1 The words "the railway" were substituted, for the words "the railway company" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act,
1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
2 The words "the railway" were substituted, for the letter and words "a railway company
carrying on business in any part of Pakistan" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the
Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
3 Explanation to sub-rule (3) of rule 48 was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of
the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
(3) The other partner or partners shall be at liberty at any
time to redeem the interest charged or, in the case of a sale
being directed, to purchase the same.
(4) Every application for an order under sub-rule (2) shall
be served on the judgment-debtor and on his partners or such of
them as are within Bangladesh.
(5) Every application made by any partner of the
judgment-debtor under sub-rule (3) shall be served on the
decree-holder and on the judgment-debtor, and on such of the
other partners as do not join in the application and as are within
Bangladesh.
(6) Service under sub-rule (4) or sub-rule (5) shall be
deemed to be service on all partners, and all orders made on
such applications shall be similarly served.
50. (1)Where a decree has been passed against a firm,
execution may be grantedExecution of
decree against
firm
(a) against any property of the partnership;
(b) against any person who has appeared in his own name
under rule 6 or rule 7 of Order XXX or who has
admitted on the pleadings that he is, or who has been
adjudged to be, a partner;
(c) against any person who has been individually served as
a partner with a summons and has failed to appear:
Provided that nothing in these sub-rules shall be deemed
to limit or otherwise affect the provisions of section 247 of the
Contract Act, 1872.
(2) Where the decree-holder claims to be entitled to cause
the decree to be executed against any person other than such a
person as is referred to in sub-rule (1), clauses (b) and (c), as
being a partner in the firm, he may apply to the Court which
passed the decree for leave, and where the liability is not
disputed, such Court may grant such leave, or, where such
liability is disputed, may order that the liability of such person
be tried and determined in any manner in which any issue in a
suit may be tried and determined.
.
(3) Where the liability of any person has been tried and
determined under sub-rule (2), the order made thereon shall
have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to
appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree.
(4) Save as against any property of the partnership, a
decree against a firm shall not release, render liable or
otherwise affect any partner therein unless he has been served
with a summons to appear and answer.
Attachment
of negotiable
instruments
51. Where the property is a negotiable instrument not
deposited in a Court, nor in the custody of a public officer, the
attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and the instrument
shall be brought into Court and held subject to further orders of
the Court.
Attachment
of property
in custody of
Court or
public
officer
52. Where the property to be attached is in the custody of
any Court or public officer, the attachment shall be made by a
notice to such Court or officer, requesting that such property,
and any interest or dividend becoming payable thereon, may be
held subject to the further orders of the Court from which the
notice is issued:
Provided that, where such property is in the custody of a
Court, any question of title or priority arising between the
decree-holder and any other person, not being the judgmentdebtor, claiming to be interested in such property by virtue of
any assignment, attachment or otherwise, shall be determined
by such Court.
Attachment
of decrees
53. (1) Where the property to be attached is a decree,
either for the payment of money or for sale in enforcement of a
mortgage or charge, the attachment shall be made,
(a) if the decrees were passed by the same Court, then by
order of such Court, and
(b) if the decree sought to be attached was passed by
another Court, then by the issue to such other Court of
a notice by the Court which passed the decree sought
to be executed, requesting such other Court to stay the
execution of its decree unless and until
(i) the Court which passed the decree sought to be
executed cancels the notice, or
(ii) the holder of the decree sought to be executed or
his judgment-debtor applies to the Court
receiving such notice to execute its own decree.
.
(2) Where a Court makes an order under clause (a) of subrule (1), or receives an application under sub-head (ii) of clause
(b) of the said sub-rule, it shall, on the application of the
creditor who has attached the decree or his judgment-debtor,
proceed to execute the attached decree and apply the net
proceeds in satisfaction of the decree sought to be executed.
(3) The holder of a decree sought to be executed by the
attachment of another decree of the nature specified in sub-rule
(1) shall be deemed to be representative of the holder of the
attached decree and to be entitled to execute such attached
decree in any manner lawful for the holder thereof.
(4) Where the property to be attached in the execution of a
decree is a decree other than a decree of the nature referred to in
sub-rule (1), the attachment shall be made, by a notice by the
Court which passed the decree sought to be executed, to the
holder of the decree sought to be attached, prohibiting him from
transferring or charging the same in any way; and, where such
decree has been passed by any other Court, also by sending to
such other Court a notice to abstain from executing the decree
sought to be attached until such notice is cancelled by the Court
from which it was sent.
(5) The holder of a decree attached under this rule shall
give the Court executing the decree such information and aid as
may reasonably be required.
(6) On the application of the holder of a decree sought to
be executed by the attachment of another decree, the Court
making an order of attachment under this rule shall give notice
of such order to the judgment-debtor bound by the decree
attached; and no payment or adjustment of the attached decree
made by the judgment-debtor in contravention of such order
after receipt of notice thereof, either through the Court or
otherwise, shall be recognized by any Court so long as the
attachment remains in force.
54. (1) Where the property is immoveable, the attachment
shall be made by an order prohibiting the judgment-debtor from
transferring or charging the property in any way, and all persons
from taking any benefit from such transfer or charge.
Attachment of
immoveable
property
.
(2) The order shall be proclaimed at some place on or
adjacent to such property by beat of drum or other customary
mode, and a copy of the order shall be affixed on a
conspicuous part of the property and then upon a conspicuous
part of the court-house, and also, where the property is land
paying revenue to the Government, in the office of the
Collector of the district in which the land is situate.
Removal of
attachment
after
satisfaction of
decree
55. Where
(a) the amount decreed with costs and all charges and
expenses resulting from the attachment of any
property are paid into Court, or
(b) satisfaction of the decree is otherwise made
through the Court or certified to the Court, or
(c) the decree is set aside or reversed,
the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn, and, in the
case of immoveable property, the withdrawal shall, if the
judgment-debtor so desires, be proclaimed at his expense, and
a copy of the proclamation shall be affixed in the manner
prescribed by the last preceding rule.
Order for
payment of
coin or
currency
notes to party
entitled under
decree
56. Where the property attached is current coin or
currency notes, the Court may, at any time during the
continuance of the attachment, direct that such coin or notes,
or a part thereof sufficient to satisfy the decree, be paid over
to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same.
Determination
of attachment
57. Where any property has been attached in execution
of a decree but by reason of the decree-holder's default the
Court is unable to proceed further with the application for
execution, it shall either dismiss the application or for any
sufficient reason adjourn the proceedings to a future date.
Upon the dismissal of such application the attachment shall
cease.
Investigation of Claims and Objections
Investigation
of claims to,
and
objections to
attachment of,
attached
property
58. (1) Where any claim is preferred to, or any objection
is made to the attachment of, any property attached in
execution of a decree on the ground that such property is not
liable to such attachment, the Court, shall proceed to
investigate the claim or objection with the like power as
regards the examination of the claimant or objector, and in all
other respects, as if he was a party to the suit:
.
Provided that no such investigation shall be made where
the Court considers that the claim or objection was designedly
or unnecessarily delayed.
(2) Where the property to which the claim or objection
applies has been advertised for sale, the Court ordering the sale
may postpone it pending the investigation of the claim or
objection.
Postponement
of sale
59. The claimant or objector must adduce evidence to
show that at the date of the attachment he had some interest in,
or was possessed of, the property attached.
Evidence to be
adduced by
claimant
60. Where upon the said investigation the Court is
satisfied that for the reason stated in the claim or objection such
property was not, when attached, in the possession of the
judgment-debtor or of some person in trust for him, or in the
occupancy of a tenant or other person paying rent to him, or
that, being in the possession of the judgment-debtor at such
time, it was so in his possession, not on his own account or as
his own property, but on account of or in trust for some other
person, or partly on his own account and partly on account of
some other person, the Court shall make an order releasing the
property, wholly or to such extent as it thinks fit, from
attachment.
Release of
property from
attachment
61. Where the Court is satisfied that the property was, at
the time it was attached, in the possession of the judgmentdebtor as his own property and not on account of any other
person, or was in the possession of some other person in trust
for him, or in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying
rent to him, the Court shall disallow the claim.
Disallowance
of claim to
property
attached
62. Where the Court is satisfied that the property is
subject to a mortgage or charge in favour of some person not in
possession, and thinks fit to continue the attachment, it may do
so, subject to such mortgage or charge.
Continuance
of attachment
subject to
claim of
incumbrancer
63. [Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983),
section 5.]
.
Sale Generally
Power to
order property
attached to be
sold and
proceeds to be
paid to person
entitled
64. Any Court executing a decree may order that any
property attached by it and liable to sale, or such portion
thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be
sold, and that the proceeds of such sale, or a sufficient portion
thereof, shall be paid to the party entitled under the decree to
receive the same.
Sales by
whom
conducted and
how made
65. Save as otherwise prescribed, every sale in execution
of a decree shall be conducted by an officer of the Court or by
such other person as the Court may appoint in this behalf, and
shall be made by public auction in manner prescribed.
Proclamation
of sales by
public auction
66. (1) Where any property is ordered to be sold by
public auction in execution of a decree, the Court shall cause a
proclamation of the intended sale to be made in the language
of such Court.
(2) Such proclamation shall be drawn up after notice to
the decree-holder and the judgment-debtor and shall state the
time and place of sale, and specify as fairly and accurately as
possible-
(a) the property to be sold;
(b) the revenue assessed upon the estate or part of the
estate, where the property to be sold is an interest in an
estate or in part of an estate paying revenue to the
Government;
(c) any incumbrance to which the property is liable;
(d) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is
ordered; and
(e) every other thing which the Court considers material
for a purchaser to know in order to judge of the nature
and value of the property.
(3) Every application for an order for sale under this rule
shall be accompanied by a statement signed and verified in the
manner hereinbefore prescribed for the signing and
verification of pleadings and containing, so far as they are
known to or can be ascertained by the person making the
verification, the matters required by sub-rule (2) to be
specified in the proclamation.
(4) For the purpose of ascertaining the matters to be
specified in the proclamation, the Court may summon any
.
person whom it thinks necessary to summon and may examine
him in respect to any such matters and require him to produce
any document in his possession or power relating thereto.
67. (1) Every proclamation shall be made and published, as
nearly as may be, in the manner prescribed by rule 54, sub-rule (2).
Mode of
making
proclamation
(2) Where the Court so directs, such proclamation shall
also be published in the official Gazette or in a local newspaper,
or in both, and the costs of such publication shall be deemed to
be costs of the sale.
(3) Where property is divided into lots for the purpose of
being sold separately, it shall not be necessary to make a separate
proclamation for each lot unless proper notice of the sale cannot,
in the opinion of the Court, otherwise be given.
68. Save in the case of property of the kind described in the
proviso to rule 43, no sale hereunder shall, without the consent in
writing of the judgment-debtor, take place until after the
expiration of at least thirty days in the case of immoveable
property, and of at least fifteen days in the case of moveable
property, calculated from the date on which the copy of the
proclamation has been affixed on the court-house of the Judge
ordering the sale.
Time of sale
69. (1) The Court may, in its discretion, adjourn any sale
hereunder to a specified day and hour, and the officer conducting
any such sale may in his discretion adjourn the sale, recording
his reasons for such adjournment:
Adjournment
or stoppage
of sale
Provided that, where the sale is made in, or within the
precincts of, the court-house, no such adjournment shall be made
without the leave of the Court.
(2) Where a sale is adjourned under sub-rule (1) for a longer
period than 1
[thirty] days, a fresh proclamation under rule 67 shall
be made, unless the judgment-debtor consents to waive it.
(3) Every sale shall be stopped if, before the lot is knocked
down, the debt and costs (including the costs of the sale) are
tendered to the officer conducting the sale, or proof is given to
his satisfaction that the amount of such debt and costs has been
paid into Court which ordered the sale.

1 The word "thirty" was substituted, for the word "seven" by section 5 of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Saving of
certain sales
70. Nothing in rules 66 to 69 shall be deemed to apply to
any case in which the execution of a decree has been
transferred to the Collector.
Defaulting
purchaser
answerable
for loss on resale
71. Any deficiency of price which may happen on a resale by reason of the purchaser's default, and all expenses
attending such re-sale, shall be certified to the Court or to the
Collector or subordinate of the Collector, as the case may be,
by the officer or other person holding the sale, and shall, at the
instance of either the decree-holder or the judgment-debtor, be
recoverable from the defaulting purchaser under the
provisions relating to the executing of a decree for the
payment of money.
Decree-holder
not to bid for or
buy property
without
permission
72. (1) No holder of a decree in execution of which
property is sold shall, without the express permission of the
Court, bid for or purchase the property.
Where
decree-holder
purchases,
amount of
decree may be
taken as
payment
(2) Where a decree-holder purchases with such
permission, the purchase-money and the amount due on the
decree may, subject to the provisions of section 73, be set-off
against one another, and the Court executing the decree shall
enter up satisfaction of the decree in whole or in part
accordingly.
(3) Where a decree-holder purchases, by himself or
through another person, without such permission, the Court
may, if it thinks fit, on the application of the judgment-debtor
or any other person whose interests are affected by the sale, by
order set aside the sale; and the costs of such application and
order, and any deficiency of price which may happen on the
re-sale and all expenses attending it, shall be paid by the
decree-holder.
Restriction on
bidding or
purchase by
officers
73. No officer or other person having any duty to
perform in connection with any sale shall, either directly or
indirectly, bid for, acquire or attempt to acquire any interest in
the property sold.
Sale of Moveable Property
Sale of
agricultural
produce
74. (1) Where the property to be sold is agricultural
produce, the sale shall be held,
(a) if such produce is a growing crop, on or near the land
on which such crop has grown, or,
.
(b) if such produce has been cut or gathered, at or near the
threshing-floor or place for treading out gain or the like
or fodder-stack on or in which it is deposited:
Provided that the Court may direct the sale to be held at the
nearest place of public resort, if it is of opinion that the produce
is thereby likely to sell to gather advantage.
(2) Where, on the produce being put up for sale,
(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person holding the
sale, is not offered for it, and
(b) the owner of the produce or a person authorized to act in
his behalf applies to have the sale postponed till the next
day or, if a market is held at the place of sale, the next
market-day,
the sale shall be postponed accordingly and shall be then
completed, whatever price may be offered for the produce.
75. (1) Where the property to be sold is a growing crop
and the crop from its nature admits of being stored but has not
yet been stored, the day of the sale shall be so fixed as to admit
of its being made ready for storing before the arrival of such day,
and the sale shall not be held until the crop has been cut or
gathered and is ready for storing.
Special
provisions
relating to
growing
crops
(2) Where the crop from its nature does not admit of being
stored, it may be sold before it is cut and gathered, and the
purchaser shall be entitled to enter on the land, and to do all that is
necessary for the purpose of tending and cutting or gathering it.
76. Where the property to be sold is a negotiable instrument
or a share in a corporation, the Court may, instead of directing
the sale to be made by public auction, authorize the sale of such
instrument or share through a broker.
Negotiable
instruments
and shares in
corporations
77. (1) Where moveable property is sold by public auction
the price of each lot shall be paid at the time of sale or as soon as
the officer or other person holding the sale directs, and in default
of payment the property shall forthwith be re-sold.
Sale by
public
auction
(2) On payment of the purchase-money, the officer or other
person holding the sale shall grant a receipt for the same, and the
sale shall become absolute.
.
(3) Where the moveable property to be sold is a share in
goods belonging to the judgment-debtor and a co-owner, and
two or more persons, of whom one is such co-owner,
respectively bid the same sum for such property or for any lot,
the bidding shall deemed to be the bidding of the co-owner.
Irregularity
not to vitiate
sale, but any
person injured
may sue
78. No irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale
of moveable property shall vitiate the sale; but any person
sustaining any injury by reason of such irregularity at the hand
of any other person may institute a suit against him for
compensation or (if such other person is the purchaser) for the
recovery of the specific property and for compensation in
default of such recovery.
Delivery of
moveable
property,
debts and
shares
79. (1) Where the property sold is moveable property of
which actual seizure has been made, it shall be delivered to
the purchaser.
(2) Where the property sold is moveable property in the
possession of some person other than the judgment-debtor, the
delivery thereof to the purchaser shall be made by giving
notice to the person in possession prohibiting him from
delivering possession of the property to any person except the
purchaser.
(3) Where the property sold is a debt not secured by a
negotiable instrument, or is a share in a corporation, the
delivery thereof shall be made by a written order of the Court
prohibiting the creditor from receiving the debt or any interest
thereon, and the debtor from making payment thereof to any
person except the purchaser, or prohibiting the person in
whose name the share may be standing from making any
transfer of the share to any person except the purchaser, or
receiving payment of any dividend or interest thereon, and the
manager, secretary or other proper officer of the corporation
from permitting any such transfer or making any such payment
to any person except the purchaser.
Transfer of
negotiable
instruments
and shares
80. (1) Where the execution of a document or the
endorsement of the party in whose name a negotiable
instrument or a share in a corporation is standing is required to
transfer such negotiable instrument or share, the Judge or such
officer as he may appoint in this behalf may execute such
document or make such endorsement as may be necessary, and
such execution or endorsement shall have the same effect as
an execution or endorsement by the party.
.
(2) Such execution or endorsement may be in the
following form, namely:
A. B. by C. D., Judge of the Court of (or as the case may
be), in a suit by E. F. against A. B.
(3) Until the transfer of such negotiable instrument or
share, the Court may, by order, appoint such person to receive
any interest or dividend due thereon and to sign a receipt for the
same; and any receipt so signed shall be as valid and effectual
for all purposes as if the same had been signed by the party
himself.
81. In the case of any moveable property not hereinbefore
provided for, the Court may make an order vesting such
property in the purchaser or as he may direct; and such property
shall vest accordingly.
Vesting order
in case of
other property
Sale of Immoveable Property
82. Sales of immoveable property in execution of decrees
may be ordered by any Court other than a Court of Small
Causes.
What Courts
may order
sales
83. (1) Where an order for the sale of immoveable
property has been made, if the judgment-debtor can satisfy the
Court that there is reason to believe that the amount of the
decree may be raised by the mortgage or lease or private sale of
such property, or some part thereof, or of any other immoveable
property of the judgment-debtor, the Court may, on his
application, postpone the sale of the property comprised in order
for sale on such terms and for such period as it thinks proper, to
enable him to raise the amount.
Postponement
of sale to
enable
judgmentdebtor to raise
amount of
decree
(2) In such case the Court shall grant a certificate to the
judgment-debtor authorizing him within a period to be
mentioned therein, and notwithstanding anything contained in
section 64, to make the proposed mortgage, lease or sale:
Provided that all monies payable under such mortgage,
lease or sale shall be paid, not to the judgment-debtor, but, save
in so far as a decree-holder is entitled to set-off such money
under the provisions of rule 72, into Court:
Provided also that no mortgage, lease or sale under this
rule shall become absolute until it has been confirmed by the
Court.
.
(3) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to apply to a
sale of property directed to be sold in execution of a decree for
sale in enforcement of a mortgage of or charge on, such
property.
Deposit by
purchaser and
re-sale on
default
84. (1) On every sale of immoveable property the
person declared to be the purchaser shall pay immediately
after such declaration a deposit of twenty-five per cent on the
amount of his purchase-money to the officer or other person
conducting the sale, and in default of such deposit, the
property shall forthwith be re-sold.
(2) Where the decree-holder is the purchaser and is
entitled to set-off the purchase-money under rule 72, the Court
may dispense with the requirements of this rule.
Time for
payment in
full of
purchasemoney
85. The full amount of purchase-money payable shall be
paid by the purchaser into Court before the Court closes on
the fifteenth day from the sale of the property:
Provided that, in calculating the amount to be so paid
into Court, the purchaser shall have the advantage of any setoff to which he may be entitled under rule 72.
Procedure in
default of
payment
86. In default of payment within the period mentioned in
the last preceding rule, the deposit may, if the Court thinks fit,
after defraying the expenses of the sale, be forfeited to the
Government, and the property shall be re-sold, and the
defaulting purchaser shall forfeit all claim to the property or to
any part of the sum for which it may subsequently be sold.
Notification
on re-sale
87. Every re-sale of immoveable property, in default of
payment of the purchase-money within the period allowed for
such payment, shall be made after the issue of a fresh
proclamation in the manner and for the period hereinbefore
prescribed for the sale.
Bid of cosharer to have
preference
88. Where the property sold is a share of undivided
immoveable property and two or more persons, of whom one
is a co-sharer, respectively bid the same for such property or
for any lot, the bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the cosharer.
.
89. (1) Where immoveable property has been sold in
execution of a decree, any person, either owing such property or
holding an interest therein by virtue of a title acquired before
such sale, may apply to have the sale set aside on his depositing
in Court,
Application to
set aside sale
on deposit
(a) for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal to five per
cent of the purchase-money, and
(b) for payment to the decree-holder, the amount specified
in the proclamation of sale as that for the recovery of
which the sale was ordered, less any amount which may,
since the date of such proclamation of sale, have been
received by the decree-holder.
(2) Where a person applies under rule 90 to set aside the
sale of his immoveable property, he shall not, unless he
withdraws his application, be entitled to make or prosecute an
application under this rule.
(3) Nothing in this rule shall relieve the judgment-debtor
from any liability he may be under in respect of costs and
interest not covered by the proclamation of sale.
90. (1) Where any immoveable property has been sold in
execution of a decree, the decree-holder, or any person entitled
to share in a rateable distribution of assets, or whose interests
are affected by the sale, may apply to the Court to set aside the
sale on the ground of a material irregularity or fraud in
publishing or conducting it:
Application to
set aside sale
on ground of
irregularity or
fraud
Provided that no sale shall be set aside on the ground of
irregularity or fraud unless upon the facts proved the Court is
satisfied that the applicant has sustained substantial injury by
reason of such irregularity or fraud.
91. The purchaser at any such sale in execution of a decree
may apply to the Court to set aside the sale, on the ground that
the judgment-debtor had on saleable interest in the property
sold.
Application by
purchaser to
set aside sale
on ground of
judgmentdebtor having
no saleable
interest
92. (1) Where no application is made under rule 89, rule
90 or rule 91, or where such application is made and disallowed,
the Court shall make an order confirming the sale, and
thereupon the sale shall become absolute.
Sale when to
become
absolute or be
set aside
.
(2) Where such application is made and allowed, and
where, in the case of an application under rule 89, the deposit
required by that rule is made within thirty days from the date
of sale, the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale:
Provided that no order shall be made unless notice of the
application has been given to all persons affected thereby.
(3) No suit to set aside an order made under this rule
shall be brought by any person against whom such order is
made.
Return of
purchasemoney in
certain cases
93. Where a sale of immoveable property is set aside
under rule 92, the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for
repayment of his purchase-money, with or without interest as
the Court may direct, against any person to whom it has been
paid.
Certificate to
purchaser
94. Where a sale of immoveable property has become
absolute, the Court shall grant a certificate specifying the
property sold and the name of the person who at the time of
sale is declared to be the purchaser. Such certificate shall bear
date the day on which the sale became absolute.
Delivery of
property in
occupancy of
judgmentdebtor
95. Where the immoveable property sold is in the
occupancy of the judgment-debtor or of some person on his
behalf or of some person claiming under a title created by the
judgment-debtor subsequently to the attachment of such
property and a certificate in respect thereof has been granted
under rule 94, the Court shall, on the application of the
purchaser, order delivery to be made by putting such
purchaser or any person whom he may appoint to receive
delivery on his behalf in possession of the property, and, if
need be, by removing any person who refuses to vacate the
same.
Delivery of
property in
occupancy of
tenant
96. Where the property sold is in the occupancy of a
tenant or other person entitled to occupy the same and a
certificate in respect thereof has been granted under rule 94,
the Court shall, on the application of the purchaser, order
delivery to be made by affixing a copy of the certificate of sale
in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to
the occupant by beat of drum or other customary mode, at
some convenient place, that the interest of the judgmentdebtor has been transferred to the purchaser.
.
Resistance to Delivery of Possession to Decree-holder or
Purchaser
97. (1) Where the holder of a decree for the possession of
immoveable property or the purchaser of any such property sold
in execution of a decree is resisted or obstructed by any person
in obtaining possession of the property, he may make an
application to the Court complaining of such resistance or
obstruction.
Resistance or
obstruction to
possession of
immoveable
property
(2) The Court shall fix a day for investigating the matter
and shall summon the party against whom the application is
made to appear and answer the same.
98. Where the Court is satisfied that the resistance or
obstruction was occasioned without any just cause by the
judgment-debtor or by some other person at his instigation, it
shall direct that the applicant be put into possession of the
property, and where the applicant is still resisted or obstructed
in obtaining possession, the Court may also, at the instance of
the applicant, order the judgment-debtor, or any person acting at
his instigation, to be detained in the civil prison for a term
which may extend to thirty days.
Resistance or
obstruction by
Judgmentdebtor
99. Where the Court is satisfied that the resistance or
obstruction was occasioned by any person (other than the
judgment-debtor) claiming in good faith to be in possession of
the property on his own account or on account of some person
other than the judgment-debtor, the Court shall make an order
dismissing the application.
Resistance or
obstruction by
bona fide
claimant
100. (1) Where any person other than the judgment-debtor
is disposed of immoveable property by the holder of a decree
for the possession of such property or, where such property has
been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser thereof, he
may make an application to the Court complaining of such
dispossession.
Dispossession
by decreeholder or
purchaser
(2) The Court shall fix a day for investigating the matter
and shall summon the party against whom the application is
made to appear and answer the same.
101. Where the Court is satisfied that the applicant was in
possession of the property on his own account or on account of
some person other than the judgment-debtor, it shall direct that
the applicant be put into possession of the property.
Bona fide
claimant to be
restored to
possession
.
Rules not
applicable to
transferee lite
bendente
102. Nothing in rules 99 and 101 shall apply to
resistance or obstruction in execution of a decree for the
possession of immoveable property by a person to whom the
judgment-debtor has transferred the property after the
institution of the suit in which the decree was passed or to the
dispossession of any such person.
Orders
conclusive
subject to
regular suit
103. Any party not being a judgment-debtor against
whom an order is made under rule 98, rule 99 or rule 101 may
institute a suit to establish the right which he claims to the
present possession of the property; but, subject to the result of
such suit (if any), the order shall be conclusive.
Direct
execution of
decree
1
[104. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Code or any other law for the time being in force, the Court
may, subject to the law of limitation, receive an application
for the execution of a decree in the record of the suit in which
the decree has been passed, or, where the record has been
called for by an Appellate or Revisional Court, in a part-file
prepared for this purpose and the Court may forthwith order
the execution of the decree.
 (2) Where the decree-holder or the purchaser of the
property sold in execution of a decree is resisted or obstructed
by the judgment-debtor or any person claiming under him or
any other person, as the case may be, in obtaining possession
of the property and the Court is satisfied in that regard, it may,
on the application of the decree-holder or the purchaser, direct
any person as the Court may appoint in this behalf and, if
necessary, the law enforcement agency to place the decreeholder or the purchaser in possession of the property.]
ORDER XXII
DEATH, MARRIAGE AND INSOLVENCY OF PARTIES
No abatement
by party's
death, if right
to sue
survives
1. The death of a plaintiff or defendant shall not cause
the suit to abate if the right to sue survives.

1
 Rule 104 was added by section 14(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
Procedure
where one of
several
plaintiffs or
defendants
dies and right
to sue
survives
2. Where there are more plaintiffs or defendants than
one, and any of them dies, and where the right to sue services
to the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or against the
surviving defendant or defendants alone, the Court shall cause
an entry to that effect to be made on the record, and the suit
shall proceed at the instance of the surviving plaintiff or
plaintiffs, or against the surviving defendant or defendants.
Procedure in
case of death
of one of
several
plaintiffs or of
sole plaintiff
3. (1) Where one of two or more plaintiffs dies and the
right to sue does not survive to the surviving plaintiff or
plaintiffs alone, or a sole plaintiff or sole surviving plaintiff
dies and the right to sue survives, the Court, on an application
made in that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the
deceased plaintiff to be made a party and shall proceed with
the suit.
(2) Where within the time limited by law no application
is made under sub-rule (1), the suit shall abate so far as the
deceased plaintiff is concerned, and, on the application of the
defendant, the Court may award to him the costs which he
may have incurred in defending the suit, to be recovered from
the estate of the deceased plaintiff.
.
4. (1) Where one of two or more defendants dies and the
right to sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or
defendants alone, or a sole defendant or sole surviving
defendant dies and the right to sue survives, the Court, on an
application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal
representative of the deceased defendant to be made a party and
shall proceed with the suit.
Procedure in
case of death
of one of
several
defendants or
of sole
defendant
(2) Any person so made a party may make any defence
appropriate to his character as legal representative of the
deceased defendant.
(3) Where within the time limited by law no application is
made under sub-rule (1), the suit shall abate as against the
deceased defendant.
1
[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (3),
the plaintiff shall not be required to substitute and shall be
exempt from the necessity of substituting the legal
representatives of any such defendant who has failed to file a
written statement or who having filed it, has failed to appear and
contest the suit at the hearing; and judgment may in such a case
be pronounced against the deceased defendant notwithstanding
the death of such defendant and shall have the same force and
effect as if it had been pronounced before the death took place.]
5. Where a question arises as to whether any person is or
is not the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or a
deceased defendant, such question shall be determined by the
Court.
Determination
of question as
to legal
representative
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
rules, whether the cause of action survives or not, there shall be
no abatement by reason of the death of either party between the
conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncing of the judgment,
but judgment may in such case be pronounced notwithstanding
the death and shall have the same force and effect as if it had
been pronounced before the death took place.
No abatement
by reason of
death after
hearing
.

1
Sub-rule (4) was added by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Suit not
abated by
marriage of
female party
7. (1) The marriage of a female plaintiff or defendant shall
not cause the suit to abate, but the suit may notwithstanding be
proceeded with to judgment, and, where the decree is against a
female defendant, it may be executed against her alone.
(2) Where the husband is by law liable for the debts of his
wife, the decree may, with the permission of the Court, be
executed against the husband also; and, in the case of judgment
for the wife, execution of the decree may, with such permission,
be issued upon the application of the husband, where the
husband is by law entitled to the subject-matter of the decree.
When
plaintiff's
insolvency
bars suit
8. (1)The insolvency of a plaintiff in any suit which the
assignee or receiver might maintain for the benefit of his
creditors, shall not cause the suit to abate, unless such assignee
or receiver declines to continue the suit or (unless for any
special reason the Court otherwise directs) to give security for
the costs thereof within such time as the Court may direct.
Procedure
where
assignee fails
to continue
suit or give
security
(2) Where the assignee or receiver neglects or refuses to
continue the suit and to give such security within the time so
ordered, the defendant may apply for the dismissal of the suit on
the ground of the plaintiff's insolvency, and the Court may make
an order dismissing the suit and awarding to the defendant the
costs which he has incurred in defending the same to be proved
as a debt against the plaintiff's estate.
Effect of
abatement or
dismissal
9. (1) Where a suit abates or is dismissed under this
Order, no fresh suit shall be brought on the same cause of
action.
(2) The plaintiff or the person claiming to be the legal
representative of a deceased plaintiff or the assignee or the
receiver in the case of an insolvent plaintiff may apply for an
order to set aside the abatement or dismissal; and if it is proved
that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from continuing
the suit, the Court shall set aside the abatement or dismissal
upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.
(3) The provisions of 1
[sections 4 and 5] of the 1
[Limitation
Act, 1908] shall apply to application under sub-rule (2).
.

1 The word and figures "section 4 and 5" and the words, comma and figure "Limitation
Act, 1908" were substituted, for the word and figure "section 5" and words, comma
and figure "Indian Limitation Act, 1877" respectively by section 3 and 2nd Schedule
of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
1
[9A. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 9 or any
other law, where the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff
or the assignee or the receiver of any insolvent plaintiff files an
application for setting aside abatement or dismissal made under
this Order, within sixty days of abatement or dismissal, the
Court may, in order to avoid delay and expedite disposal, set
aside the abatement or dismissal without requiring the applicant
to adduce evidence to prove sufficient cause as required under
rule 9, but requiring him to pay such cost not exceeding three
thousand taka as the Court may deem appropriate.]
Directly setting
aside abatement
or dismissal
10. (1) In other cases of an assignment, creation or
devolution of any interest during the pendency of a suit, the suit
may, by leave of the Court, be continued by or against the
person to or upon whom such interest has come or developed.
(2) The attachment of a decree pending an appeal
therefrom shall be deemed to be an interest entitling the person
who procured such attachment to the benefit to sub-rule (1).
Procedure in
case of
assignment
before final
order in suit
11. In the application of this Order to appeals, so far as
may be, the word "plaintiff" shall be held to include an
appellant, the word "defendant" a respondent, and the word
"suit" an appeal.
Application of
Order to appeals
12. Nothing in rules 3, 4 and 8 shall apply to proceedings
in execution of a decree or order.
Application of
Order to
proceedings
ORDER XXIII
WITHDRAWAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF SUITS
1. (1) At any time after the institution of a suit the plaintiff
may, as against all or any of the defendants, withdraw his suit or
abandon part of his claim.
Withdrawal of
suit or
abandonment of
part of claim
(2) Where the Court is satisfied
(a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or
(b) that there are other sufficient grounds for allowing the
plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the subject-matter of
a suit or part of a claim,
.

1 Rule 9A was inserted by section 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006).
it may, on such terms as it thinks fit, grant the plaintiff
permission to withdraw from such suit or abandon such part of
a claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the
subject-matter of such suit or such part of a claim.
(3) Where the plaintiff withdraws from a suit, or abandons
part of a claim, without the permission referred to in sub-rule
(2), he shall be liable for such costs as the Court may award and
shall be precluded from instituting any fresh suit in respect of
such subject-matter or such part of the claim.
(4) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the
Court to permit one of several plaintiffs to withdraw without the
consent of the others.
Limitation law
not affected by
first suit
2. In any fresh suit instituted on permission granted under
the last preceding rule, the plaintiff shall be bound by the law of
limitation in the same manner as if the first suit had not been
instituted.
Compromise of
suit
3. Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that a
suit has been adjusted wholly or in part by any lawful
agreement or compromise, or where the defendant satisfies the
plaintiff in respect of the whole or any part of the subject-matter
of the suit, the Court shall order such agreement, compromise
or satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a decree in
accordance therewith so far as it relates to the suit.
Proceedings in
execution of
decrees not
affected
4. Nothing in this Order shall apply to any proceedings in
execution of a decree or order.
ORDER XXIV
PAYMENT INTO COURT
Deposit by
defendant of
amount in
satisfaction of
claim
1. The defendant in any suit to recover a debt or damages
may, at any stage of the suit, deposit in Court such sum of
money as he considers a satisfaction in full of the claim.
Notice of
deposit
2. Notice of the deposit shall be given through the Court
by the defendant to the plaintiff, and the amount of the deposit
shall (unless the Court otherwise directs) be paid to the plaintiff
on his application.
Interest on
deposit not
allowed to
plaintiff after
notice
3. No interest shall be allowed to the plaintiff on any sum
deposited by the defendant from the date of the receipt of such
notice, whether the sum deposited is in full of the claim or falls
short thereof.
.
4. (1) Where the plaintiff accepts such amounts as
satisfaction in part only of his claim, he may prosecute his suit
for the balance; and, if the Court decides that the deposit by the
defendant was a full satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim, the
plaintiff shall pay the costs of the suit incurred after the deposit
and the costs incurred previous thereto, so far as they were
caused by excess in the plaintiff's claim.
Procedure where
plaintiff accepts
deposit as
satisfaction in
part
(2) Where the plaintiff accepts such amounts as
satisfaction in full of his claim, he shall present to the Court a
statement to that effect, and such statement shall be filed and
the Court shall pronounce judgment accordingly; and, in
directing by whom the costs of each party are to be paid, the
Court shall consider which of the parties is most to blame for
the litigation.
Procedure where
he accepts it as
satisfaction in
full
Illustrations
(a) A owes B Taka 100. B sues A for the amount, having made
no demand for payment and having no reason to believe that the delay
caused by making a demand would place him at a disadvantage. On the
plaint being filed, A pays the money into Court. B accepts it in full
satisfaction of his claim, but the Court should not allow him any costs,
the litigation being presumably groundless on his part.
(b) B sues A under the circumstances mentioned in illustration
(a). On the plaint being filed, A disputes the claim. Afterwards A pays
the money into Court. B accepts it in full satisfaction of his claim. The
Court should also give B his costs of suit, A's conduct having shown
that the litigation was necessary.
(c) A owes B Taka 100, and is willing to pay him that sum
without suit. B claims Taka 150 and sues A for that amount. On the
plaint being filed A pays Taka 100 into Court and disputes only his
liability to pay the remaining Taka 50. B accepts the taka 100 in full
satisfaction of his claim. The Court should order him to pay A's costs.
ORDER XXV
SECURITY FOR COSTS
1. (1) Where, at any stage of a suit, it appears to the Court
that a sole plaintiff is, or (when there are more plaintiffs than
one) that all the plaintiffs are residing out of Bangladesh, and
that such plaintiff does not, or that no one of such plaintiffs
does, possess any sufficient immoveable property within
Bangladesh other than the property in suit, the Court may, either
of its own motion or on the application of any defendant, order
the plaintiff or plaintiffs, within a time fixed by it, to give
security for the payment of all costs incurred and likely to be
incurred by any defendant.
When security
for costs may be
required from
plaintiff
.
Residence out of
Bangladesh
(2) Whoever leaves Bangladesh under such
circumstances as to afford reasonable probability that he will
not be forthcoming whenever he may be called upon to pay
costs shall be deemed to be residing out of Bangladesh
within the meaning of sub-rule (1).
(3) On the application of any defendant in a suit for the
payment of money, in which the plaintiff is a woman, the
Court may at any stage of the suit make a like order if it is
satisfied that such plaintiff does not possess any sufficient
immoveable property within Bangladesh.
Effect of failure
to furnish
security
2. (1) In the event of such security not being furnished
within the time fixed, the Court shall make an order
dismissing the suit unless the plaintiff or plaintiffs are
permitted to withdraw therefrom.
(2) Where a suit is dismissed under this rule, the
plaintiff may apply for an order to set the dismissal aside,
and, if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he
was prevented by any sufficient cause from furnishing the
security within the time allowed, the Court shall set aside the
dismissal upon such terms as to security, costs or otherwise
as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with
the suit.
(3) The dismissal shall not be set aside unless notice of
such application has been served on the defendant.
ORDER XXVI
COMMISSIONS
Commissions to Examine Witnesses
Cases in which
Court may issue
commission to
examine witness
1. Any Court may in any suit issue a commission for
the examination on interrogatories or otherwise of any
person resident within the local limits of its jurisdiction who
is exempted under this Code from attending the Court or
who is from sickness or infirmity unable to attend it.
Order for
commission
2. An order for the issue of a commission for the
examination of a witness may be made by the Court either of
its own motion or on the application, supported by affidavit
or otherwise, of any party to the suit or of the witness to be
examined.
.
3. A commission for the examination of a person who
resides within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court
issuing the same may be issued to any person whom the Court
thinks fit to execute it.
Where witness
resides within
Court's
jurisdiction
4. (1) Any Court may in any suit issue a commission for
the examination of
(a) any person resident beyond the local limits of its
jurisdiction;
(b) any person who is about to leave such limits before the
date on which he is required to be examined in Court;
and
(c) any person in the service of the 1
[Republic] who
cannot, in the opinion of the Court, attend without
detriment to the public service.
Persons for
whose
examination
commission may
issue
(2) Such commission may be issued to any Court, not
being the High Court Division, within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction such person resides, or to any pleader or other
person whom the Court issuing the commission may appoint.
(3) The Court on issuing any commission under this rule
shall direct whether the commission shall be returned to itself
or to any subordinate Court.
5. Where any Court to which application is made for the
issue of commission for the examination of a person residing at
any place not within Bangladesh is satisfied that the evidence
of such person is necessary, the Court may issue such
commission or a letter of request.
Commission or
Request to
examine witness
not within
Bangladesh
6. Every Court receiving a commission for the
examination of any person shall examine him or cause him to
be examined pursuant thereto.
Court to
examine witness
pursuant to
commission
7. Where a commission has been duly executed, it shall
be returned, together with the evidence taken under it, to the
Court from which it was issued, unless the order for issuing the
commission has otherwise directed, in which case the
commission shall be returned in terms of such order; and the
Return of
commission
with depositions
of witnesses
.

1 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd
Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII
of 1973).
commission and the return thereto and the evidence taken
under it shall (subject to the provisions of the next following
rule) form part of the record of the suit.
When
depositions may
be read in
evidence
8. Evidence taken under a commission shall not be read
as evidence in the suit without the consent of the party against
whom the same is offered, unless
(a) the person who gave the evidence is beyond the
jurisdiction of the Court, or dead or unable from
sickness or infirmity to attend to be personally
examined, or exempted from personal appearance
in Court, or is a person in the service of the
1
[Republic] who cannot, in the opinion of the
Court, attend without detriment to the public
service, or
(b) the Court in its discretion dispenses with the proof
of any of the circumstances mentioned in clause
(a), and authorises the evidence of any person
being read as evidence in the suit, notwithstanding
proof that the cause for taking such evidence by
commission has ceased at the time of reading the
same.
Commissions for Local Investigations
Commissions
to make local
investigations
9. In any suit in which the Court deems a local
investigation to be requisite or proper for the purpose of
elucidating any matter in dispute, or of ascertaining the
market-value of any property, or the amount or any mesne
profits or damages or annual net profits, the Court may issue a
commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to
make such investigation and to report thereon to the Court
2
[within such time not exceeding three months as may be fixed
by the Court]:

1 The words "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd
Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII
of 1973).
2 The words "within such time not exceeding three months as may be fixed by the
Court" were added by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
1
[Provided that the Court may, on the prayer of the
Commissioner and on sufficient cause being shown, extend the
time.]
10. (1) The Commissioner, after such local inspection as
he deems necessary and after reducing to writing the evidence
taken by him, shall return such evidence, together with his
report in writing signed by him to the Court.
Procedure of
Commissioner
(2) The report of the Commissioner and the evidence
taken by him (but not the evidence without the report) shall be
evidence in the suit and shall form part of the record; but the
Court or, with the permission of the Court, any of the parties to
the suit may examine the Commissioner personally in open
Court touching any of the matters referred to him or mentioned
in his report, or as to his report, or as to the manner in which he
has made the investigation.
Report and
depositions to be
evidence in suit.
Commissioner
may be
examined in
person
(3) Where the Court is for any reason dissatisfied with the
proceedings of the Commissioner, it may direct such further
inquiry to be made as it think fit.
Commissions to examine Accounts
11. In any suit in which an examination or adjustment of
accounts is necessary, the Court may issue a commission to
such person as it thinks fit directing him to make such
examination or adjustment.
Commission to
examine or
adjust accounts
12. (1) The Court shall furnish the Commissioner with
such part of the proceedings and such instructions as appear
necessary, and the instructions shall distinctly specify whether
the Commissioner is merely to transmit the proceedings which
he may hold on the inquiry, or also to report his own opinion on
the point referred for his examination.
Court to give
Commissioner
necessary
instructions.
Proceedings and
report to be
evidence.
Court may direct
further inquiry
(2) The proceedings and report (if any) of the
Commissioner shall be evidence in the suit, but where the Court
has reason to be dissatisfied with them, it may direct such
further inquiry as it shall think fit.

1 The proviso was substituted, for the former proviso by section 5 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
Commissions to make Partitions
Commission to
make partition of
immoveable
property
13. Where a preliminary decree for partition has been
passed, the Court may, in any case not provided for by section
54, issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit to make
the partition or separation according to the rights as declared in
such decree.
Procedure of
Commissioner
14. (1) The Commissioner shall, after such inquiry as may
be necessary, divide the property into as many shares as may be
directed by the order under which the commission was issued,
and shall allot such shares to the parties, and may, if authorized
thereto by the said order, award sums to be paid for the purpose
of equalizing the value of the shares.
(2) The Commissioner shall then prepare and sign a report
or the Commissioners (where the commission was issued to
more than one person and they cannot agree) shall prepare and
sign separate reports appointing the share of each party and
distinguishing each share (if so directed by the said order) by
metes and bounds. Such report or reports shall be annexed to
the commission and transmitted to the Court 1
[within such time
not exceeding three months as may be fixed by the Court]; and
the Court, after hearing any objections which the parties may
make to the report or reports, shall confirm, vary or set aside the
same 2
[:
Provided that the Court may, on the prayer of the
Commissioner and on sufficient cause being shown, extend the
time.]
(3) Where the Court confirms or varies the report or
reports it shall pass a decree in accordance with the same as
confirmed or varied; but where the Court sets aside the report or
reports it shall either issue a new commission or make such
other order as it shall think fit.

1 The words "within such time not exceeding three months as may be fixed by the
Court" were inserted by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
2 A colon was substituted, for full stop and thereafter the proviso was added by section
5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No.
XLVIII of 1983).
General Provisions
15. Before issuing any commission under this Order, the
Court may order such sum (if any) as it thinks reasonable for
the expenses of the commission to be, within a time to be fixed,
paid into Court by the party at whose instance or for whose
benefit the commission is issued.
Expenses of
Commission to
be paid into
Court
16. Any Commissioner appointed under this Order may,
unless otherwise directed by the order of appointment,-
Powers of
Commissioners
(a) examine the parties themselves and any witness whom
they or any of them may produce, and any other person
whom the Commissioner thinks proper to call upon to
give evidence in the matter referred to him;
(b) call for and examine documents and other thinks
relevant to the subject of inquiry;
(c) at any reasonable time enter upon or into any land or
building mentioned in the order.
17. (1) The provisions of this Code relating to the
summoning, attendance and examination of witnesses, and to
the remuneration of, and penalties to be imposed upon,
witnesses, shall apply to persons required to give evidence or to
produce documents under this order whether the commission in
execution of which they are so required has been issued by a
Court situate within or by a Court situate beyond the limits of
Bangladesh, and for the purposes of this rule the commissioner
shall be deemed to be a Civil Court.
Attendance and
examination of
witnesses before
Commissioner
(2) A Commissioner may apply to any Court (not being
the High Court Division) within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction a witness resides for the issue of any process which
he may find it necessary to issue to or against such witness, and
such Court may, in its discretion, issue such process as it
considers reasonable and proper.
18. (1) Where a commission is issued under this Order,
the Court shall direct that the parties to the suit shall appear
before the Commissioner in person or by their agents or
pleaders.
Parties to appear
before
Commissioner
(2) Where all or any of the parties do not so appear, the
Commissioner may proceed in their absence.
1
[Commissions issued at the Instance of Foreign Tribunals
Cases in which
High Court
Division may
issue
commission to
examine witness
19. (1) If the High Court Division is satisfied
(a) that a foreign Court situated in a foreign country
wishes to obtain the evidence of a witness in any
proceeding before it,
(b) that the proceeding is of a civil nature, and
(c) that the witness is residing within the limits of the
2
[High Court Divisions,] appellate jurisdiction,
it may, subject to the provisions of rule 20, issue a commission
for the examination of such witness.
(2) Evidence may be given of the matters specified in
clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-rule (1)
(a) by a certificate signed by the consular officer of the
foreign country of the highest rank in Bangladesh
and transmitted to the High Court Division through
the Government, or
(b) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and
transmitted to the High Court Division through the
Government, or
(c) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and
produced before the High Court Division by a party
to the proceeding.
Application for
commission
20. The High Court Division may issue a commission
under rule 19
(a) upon application by a party to the proceeding before
the foreign Court, or
(b) upon an application by a law officer of the
Government acting under instructions from the
Government.

1 The sub-heading "Commissions issued at the Instance of Foreign Tribunals" and rules
19, 20, 21 and 22 were inserted by section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1932 (Act No. X of 1932).
2 The words and comma "High Court Divisions," were substituted, for the words "High
Courts" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and
Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
21. A commission under rule 19 may be issued to any
Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the witness
resides, or, where the witness resides within the local limits of
the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court
Division, to any person whom the Court thinks fit to execute the
commission.
To whom
commission may
be issued
22. The provisions of rules 6, 15, 16, 17 and 18 of this
Order is so far as they are applicable shall apply to the issue,
execution and return of such commissions, and when any such
commission has been duly executed it shall be returned,
together with the evidence taken under it, to the High Court
Division, which shall forward it to the Government, along with
the letter of request for transmission to the foreign Court.]
Issue, execution
and return of
commissions,
and transmission
of evidence to
foreign Court
1
[Exclusion of time taken by Commissioner
23. Where a commission is issued for any purpose at any
stage of a suit, the time taken by the Commissioner for
returning the Commission after execution or for submitting the
report, as the case may be, shall be excluded from the time fixed
for doing anything or performing any act at that stage.]
Exclusion of
time taken by
Commissioner
ORDER XXVII
SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR PUBLIC OFFICERS
IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY
1. In any suit by or against the Government, the plaint or
written statement shall be signed by such person as the
Government may, by general or special order, appoint in this
behalf, and shall be verified by any person whom the
Government may so appoint and who is acquainted with the
facts of the case.
Suits by or
against
Government
2. Persons being ex-officio or otherwise authorised to act
for the Government in respect of any judicial proceeding shall
be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom appearances,
acts and applications under this Code may be made or done on
behalf of the Government.
Persons
authorized to act
for Government
.

1
Sub-heading "Exclusion of time taken by commissioner" and rule 23 were added by
section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance
No. XLVIII of 1983).
Plaints in suits
by or against
Government
3. In suits by or against the Government, instead of
inserting in the plaint the name and description and place of
residence of the plaintiff or defendant, it shall be sufficient to
insert the appropriate name as provided in section 79.
Agent for
Government to
receive process
4. The Government pleader in any Court shall be the agent
of the Government for the purpose of receiving processes
against the Government issued by such Court.
Fixing of day for
appearance on
behalf of
Government
5. The Court, in fixing the day for the Government to
answer to the plaint, shall allow a reasonable time for the
necessary communication with the Government through the
proper channel, and for the issue of instructions to the
Government pleader to appear and answer on behalf of the
Government, and may extend the time at its discretion.
Attendance of
person able to
answer questions
relating to suit
against
Government
6. The Court may also, in any case in which the
Government pleader is not accompanied by any person on the
part of the Government, who may be able to answer any
material questions relating to the suit, direct the attendance of
such a person.
Extension of
time to enable
public officer
to make
reference to
Government
7. (1) Where the defendant is a public officer and, on
receiving the summons, considers it proper to make a reference
to the Government before answering the plaint, he may apply to
the Court to grant such extension of the time fixed in the
summons as may be necessary to enable him to make such
reference and to receive orders thereon through the proper
channel.
(2) Upon such application the Court shall extend the time
for so long as appears it to be necessary.
Procedure in
suits against
public officer
8. (1) Where the Government undertakes the defence of a
suit against a public officer the Government pleader, upon
being furnished with authority to appear and answer the plaint,
shall apply to the Court, and upon such application the Court
shall cause a note of his authority to be entered in the register
of civil suits.
(2) Where no application under sub-rule (1) is made by
the Government pleader on or before the day fixed in the notice
for the defendant to appear and answer, the case shall proceed
as in a suit between private parties:
Provided that the defendant shall not be liable to arrest,
nor his property to attachment, otherwise than in execution of a
decree.
.
1
[8A. No such security as is mentioned in rules 5 and 6 of
Order XLI shall be required from the Government or, where
the Government has undertaken the defence of the suit, from
any public officer sued in respect of an act alleged to be done
by him in his official capacity.
No security to be
required from
Government or a
public officer in
certain cases
8B. [Omitted by the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and
Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973), section 3 and
2nd Schedule.]]
2
[ORDER XXVIIA
SUITS INVOLVING ANY SUBSTANTIAL QUESTION AS TO THE
INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
1. In any suit in which it appears to the Court that any
substantial question as to the interpretation of constitutional
law is involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that
question until after notice has been given to the Attorney
General for Bangladesh if the question of law concerns the
Government 3
[* * *].
Notice to the
Attorney
General
2. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order
that the Government shall be added as a defendant in any suit
involving any substantial question as to the interpretation of
constitutional law if the Attorney General for Bangladesh
4
[***] whether upon receipt of notice under rule 1, or
otherwise, applies for such addition is necessary or desirable
for the satisfactory determination of the question of law
involved.
Court may add
Government as
party
.

1 Rules 8A and 8B were inserted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian
Laws) Order, 1937.
2 Order XXVIIA was inserted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1942
(Act No. XXIII of 1942).
3 The words "and to the Advocate-General of the Province if the question of Law
concerns a Provincial Government" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the
Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
4 The words "or the Advocate-General of the Province as the case may be" were omitted
by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration)
Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
Costs when
Government
added as party
3. Where under rule 2 Government is added as a
defendant in a suit, the Attorney General 1
[* * *] or the
Government shall not be entitled to or liable for costs in the
Court which ordered the addition unless the Court having
regard to all the circumstances of the case for any special
reason otherwise orders.
Application
of Order to
appeals
4. In the application of this Order to appeals the word
"defendant" shall be held to include a respondent and the word
"suit" an appeal.]
ORDER XXVIII
SUITS BY OR AGAINST MILITARY OR NAVAL
MEN OR AIRMEN
Officers,
soldiers, sailors
or airmen who
cannot obtain
leave may
authorise any
person to sue or
defend for them
1. (1) Where any officer, soldier, sailor or airman
actually in the service of the 2
[Republic] in such capacity is a
party to a suit, and cannot obtain leave of absence for the
purpose of prosecuting or defending the suit in person, he may
authorise any person to sue or defend in his stead.
(2) The authority shall be in writing and shall be signed
by the officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the presence of (a)
his commanding officer, or the next subordinate officer, if the
party is himself the commanding officer, or (b) where the
officer, soldier, sailor or airman is serving in military, naval or
air force staff employment, the head or other superior officer
of the office in which he is employed. Such commanding or
other officer shall counter sign the authority, which shall be
filed in Court.
(3) When so filed the counter signature shall be
sufficient proof that the authority was duly executed, and that
the officer, soldier, sailor or airman by whom it was granted
could not obtain leave of absence for the purpose of
prosecuting or defending the suit in person.
.

1 The comma and words ", the Advocate-General" were omitted by section 3 and 2nd
Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII
of 1973).
2 The word "Republic" was substituted, for the word "State" by section 3 and 2nd
Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII
of 1973).
Explanation.-In this Order the expression "commanding
officer" means the officer in actual command for the time being
of any regiment, corps, ship, detachment or deport to which the
officer, soldier, sailor or airman belongs.
2. Any person authorised by an officer, soldier, sailor or
airman to prosecute or defend a suit in his stead may prosecute
or defend it in person in the same manner as the officer, soldier,
sailor or airman could do if present; or he may appoint a pleader
to prosecute or defend the suit on behalf of such officer, soldier,
sailor or airman.
Person so
authorised
may act
personally or
appoint
pleader
3. Processes served upon any person authorised by an
officer, soldier, sailor or airman under rule 1 or upon any
pleader appointed as aforesaid by such person shall be as
effectual as if they had been served on the party in person.
Service on
person so
authorised, or
on his pleader,
to be good
service
ORDER XXIX
SUITS BY OR AGAINST CORPORATIONS
1. In suits by or against a corporation, any pleading may
be signed and verified on behalf of the corporation by the
secretary or by any director or other principal officer of the
corporation who is able to depose to the facts of the case.
Subscription
and
verification of
pleading
2. Subject to any statutory provision regulating service of
process, where the suit is against a corporation, the summons
may be servedService on
corporation
(a) on the secretary, or on any director, or other principal
officer of the corporation, or
(b) by leaving it or sending it by post addressed to the
corporation at the registered office, or if there is no
registered office then at the place where the corporation
carries on business.
3. The Court may, at any stage of the suit, require the
personal appearance of the secretary or of any director, or other
principal officer of the corporation who may be able to answer
material question relating to the suit.
Power to
require
personal
attendance of
officer of
corporation .
ORDER XXX
SUITS BY OR AGAINST FIRMS AND PERSONS CARRYING ON BUSINESS
IN NAMES OTHER THAN THEIR OWN
Suing of
partners in
name of firm
1. (1) Any two or more persons claiming or being liable
as partners and carrying on business in Bangladesh may sue or
be sued in the name of the firm (if any ) of which such persons
were partners at the time of the accruing of the cause of
action, and any party to a suit may in such case apply to the
Court for a statement of the names and addresses of the
persons who were, at the time of the accruing of the cause of
actions, partners in such firm, to be furnished and verified in
such manner as the Court may direct.
(2) Where persons sue or are sued as partners in the
name of their firm under sub-rule (1), it shall, in the case of
any pleading or other document required by or under this
Code to be signed, verified or certified by the plaintiff or the
defendant, suffice if such pleading or other document is
signed, verified or certified by any one of such person.
Disclosure of
partners'
names
2. (1) Where a suit is instituted by partners in the name
of their firm, the plaintiffs or their pleader shall, on demand in
writing by or on behalf of any defendant, forthwith declare in
writing the names and places of residence of all the persons
constituting the firm on whose behalf the suit is instituted.
(2) Where the plaintiffs or their pleader fail to comply
with any demand made under sub-rule (1), all proceedings in
the suit may, upon an application for that purpose, be stayed
upon such terms as the Court may direct.
(3) Where the names of the partners are declared in the
manner referred to in sub-rule (1), the suit shall proceed in the
same manner, and the same consequences in all respects shall
follow, as if they had been named as plaintiffs in the plaint:
Provided that all the proceedings shall nevertheless
continue in the name of the firm.
Service 3. Where persons are sued as partners in the name of
their firm, the summons shall be served either
(a) upon any one or more of the partners, or
(b) at the principal place at which the partnership business is
carried on within Bangladesh upon any person having, at
the time of service, the control or management of the
partnership business there,
as the Court may direct; and such service shall be deemed good
service upon the firm so sued, whether all or any of the partners
are within or without Bangladesh:
Provided that, in the case of a partnership which has been
dissolved to the knowledge of the plaintiff before the institution
of the suit, the summons shall be served upon every person
within Bangladesh whom it is sought to make liable.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of
the Contract Act, 1872, where two or more persons may sue or
be sued in the name of a firm under the foregoing provisions and
any of such persons dies, whether before the institution or during
the pendency of any suit, it shall not be necessary to join the
legal representative of the deceased as a party to the suit.
Right of suit on
death of partner
(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall limit or otherwise affect
any right which the legal representative of the deceased may
have-
(a) to apply to be made a party to the suit, or
(b) to enforce any claim against the survivor or survivors.
5. Where a summons is issued to a firm and is served in the
manner provided by rule 3, every person upon whom it is served
shall be informed by notice in writing given at the time of such
service, whether he is served as a partner or as a person having
the control or management of the partnership business, or in both
characters, and, in default of such notice, the person served shall
be deemed to be served as a partner.
Notice in what
capacity served
6. Where persons are sued as partners in the name of their
firm, they shall appear individually in their own names, but all
subsequent proceedings shall, nevertheless, continue in the name
of the firm.
Appearance of
partners
7. Where a summons is served in the manner provided by
rule 3 upon a person having the control or management of the
partnership business, no appearance by him shall be necessary
unless he is a partner of the firm sued.
No appearance
except by
partners
.
Appearance
under protest
8. Any person served with summons as a partner under
rule 3 may appear under protest, denying that he is a partner,
but such appearance shall not preclude the plaintiff from
otherwise serving a summons on the firm and obtaining a
decree against the firm in default of appearance where no
partner has appeared.
Suits between
co-partners
9. This Order shall apply to suits between a firm and one
or more of the partners therein and to suits between firms
having one or more partners in common; but no execution shall
be issued in such suits except by leave of the Court, and, on an
application for leave to issue such execution, all such accounts
and inquiries may be directed to be taken and made and
directions given as may be just.
Suit against
person
carrying on
business in
name of other
than his own
10. Any person carrying on business in a name or style
other than his own name may be sued in such name or style as
if it were a firm name; and, so far as the nature of the case will
permit, all rules under this Order shall apply.
ORDER XXXI
SUITS BY OR AGAINST TRUSTEES, EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS
Representation
of beneficiaries
in suits
concerning
property vested
in trustees, etc
1. In all suits concerning property vested in a trustee,
executor or administrator, where the contention is between the
persons beneficially interested in such property and a third
person, the trustee, executor or administrator shall represent the
persons so interested, and it shall not ordinarily be necessary to
make them parties to the suit. But the Court may, if it thinks fit,
order them or any of them to be made parties.
Joinder of
trustees,
executors and
administrators
2. Where there are several trustees, executors or
administrators, they shall all be made parties to a suit against
one or more of them:
Provided that the executors who have not proved their
testator's will, and trustees, executors and administrators
outside Bangladesh, need not be made parties.
.
3. Unless the Court directs otherwise, the husband of a
married trustee, administratrix or executrix shall not as such be
a party to a suit by or against her.
Husband of
married
executrix not to
join
ORDER XXXII
SUITS BY OR AGAINST MINORS AND PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND
1. Every suit by a minor shall be instituted in his name by
a person who in such suit shall be called the next friend of the
minor.
Minor to sue by
next friend
2. (1) Where a suit is instituted by or on behalf of a minor
without a next friend, the defendant may apply to have the
plaint taken off the file, with costs to be paid by the pleader or
other person by whom it was presented.
Where suit is
instituted
without next
friend, plaint to
be taken off the
file
(2) Notice of such application shall be given to such
person, and the Court, after hearing his objections (if any), may
make such order in the matter as it thinks fit.
3. (1) Where the defendant is a minor, the Court, on being
satisfied of the fact of his minority, shall appoint a proper
person to be guardian for the suit for such minor.
Guardian for the
suit to be
appointed by
Court for minor
defendant
(2) An order for the appointment of a guardian for the suit
may be obtained upon application in the name and on behalf of
the minor or by the plaintiff.
(3) Such application shall be supported by an affidavit
verifying the fact that the proposed guardian has no interest in
the matters in controversy in the suit adverse to that of the
minor and that he is a fit person to be so appointed.
(4) No order shall be made on any application under this
rule except upon notice to the minor and to any guardian of the
minor appointed or declared by an authority competent in that
behalf, or, where there is no such guardian, upon notice to the
father or other natural guardian of the minor, or, where there is
no father or other natural guardian, to the person in whose care
the minor is, and after hearing any objection which may be
urged on behalf of any person served with notice under this subrule.
.
(5) A person appointed under sub-rule (1) to be guardian
for the suit for a minor shall, unless his appointment is
terminated by retirement, removal or death, continue as such
throughout all proceedings arising out of the suit including
proceedings in any appellate or revisional Court and any
proceedings in the execution of a decree.
Who may act
as next friend
or be
appointed
guardian for
the suit
4. (1) Any person who is of sound mind and has attained
majority may act as next friend of a minor or as his guardian
for the suit:
Provided that the interest of such person is not adverse
to that of the minor and that he is not, in the case of a next
friend, a defendant, or, in the case of a guardian for the suit, a
plaintiff.
(2) Where a minor has a guardian appointed or declared
by competent authority, no person other than such guardian
shall act as the next friend of the minor or be appointed his
guardian for the suit unless the Court considers for reasons to
be recorded, that it is for the minor's welfare that another
person be permitted to act or be appointed, as the case may be.
(3) No person shall without his consent be appointed
guardian for the suit.
(4) Where there is no other person fit and willing to act
as guardian for the suit, the Court may appoint any of its
officers to be such guardian, and may direct that the costs to
be incurred by such officer in the performance of his duties as
such guardian shall be borne either by the parties or by any
one or more of the parties to the suit, or out of any fund in
Court in which the minor is interested, and may give
directions for the repayment or allowance of such costs as
justice and the circumstances of the case may require.
Representation
of minor by
next friend or
guardian for
the suit
5. (1) Every application to the Court on behalf of a
minor, other than an application under rule 10, sub-rule (2),
shall be made by his next friend or by his guardian for the suit.
(2) Every order made in a suit or on any application,
before the Court in or by which a minor is in any way
concerned or affected, without such minor being represented
by a next friend or guardian for the suit, as the case may be,
may be discharged, and, where the pleader of the party at
whose instance such order was obtained new, or might
reasonably have known, the fact of such minority, with costs
to be paid by such pleader.
6. (1) A next friend or guardian for the suit shall not,
without the leave of the Court, receive any money or other
moveable property on behalf of a minor either
(a) by way of compromise before decree or order, or
Receipt by
next friend or
guardian for
the suit of
property under
decree for
minor
(b) under a decree or order in favour of the minor.
(2) Where the next friend or guardian for the suit has not
been appointed or declared by competent authority to be
guardian of the property of the minor, or, having been so
appointed or declared, is under any disability known to the
Court to receive the money or other moveable property, the
Court shall, if it grants him leave to receive the property, require
such security and give such directions as will, in its opinion,
sufficiently protect the property from waste and ensure its
proper application.
7. (1) No next friend or guardian for the suit shall, without
the leave of the Court, expressly recorded in the proceedings,
enter into any agreement or compromise on behalf of a minor
with reference to the suit in which he acts as next friend or
guardian.
Agreement or
compromise
by next friend
or guardian for
the suit
(2) Any such agreement or compromise entered into
without the leave of the Court so recorded shall be voidable
against all parties other than the minor.
8. (1) Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, a next friend
shall not retire without first procuring a fit person to be put in
his place and giving security for the costs already incurred.
Retirement of
next friend
(2) The application for the appointment of a new next
friend shall be supported by an affidavit showing the fitness of
the person proposed, and also that he has no interest adverse to
that of the minor.
9. (1) Where the interest of the next friend of a minor is
adverse to that of the minor or where he is so connected with a
defendant whose interest is adverse to that of the minor as to
make it unlikely that the minor's interest will be properly
protected by him, or where he does not do his duty, or, during
the pendency of the suit, ceases to reside within Bangladesh, or
for any other sufficient cause, application may be made on
behalf of the minor or by a defendant for his removal; and the
Court, if satisfied of the sufficiency of the cause assigned, may
order the next friend to be removed accordingly, and make such
other order as to costs as it thinks fit.
Removal of
next friend
.
(2) Where the next friend is not a guardian appointed or
declared by an authority competent in this behalf, and an
application is made by a guardian so appointed or declared,
who desires to be himself appointed in the place of the next
friend, the Court shall remove the next friend unless it
considers, for reasons to be recorded by it, that the guardian
ought not to be appointed the next friend of the minor, and
shall thereupon appoint the applicant to be next friend in his
place upon such terms as to the costs already incurred in the
suit as it thinks fit.
Stay of
proceedings
on removal,
etc., of next
friend
10. (1) On the retirement, removal or death of the next
friend of a minor, further proceedings shall be stayed until the
appointment of a next friend in his place.
(2) Where the pleader of such minor omits, within a
reasonable time, to take steps to get a new next friend
appointed, any person interested in the minor or in the matter
in issue may apply to the Court for the appointment of one,
and the Court, may appoint such person as it thinks fit.
Retirement,
removal or
death of
guardian for
the suit
11. (1) Where the guardian for the suit desires to require
or does not do his duty, or where other sufficient ground is
made to appear, the Court may permit such guardian to retire
or may remove him, and may make such order as to costs as it
thinks fit.
(2) Where the guardian for the suit retires, dies or is
removed by the Court during the pendency of the suit, the
Court shall appoint a new guardian in his place.
Course to be
followed by
minor
plaintiff or
applicant on
attaining
majority
12. (1) A minor plaintiff or a minor not a party to a suit
on whose behalf an application is pending shall, on attaining
majority, elect whether he will proceed with the suit or
application.
(2) Where he elects to proceed with the suit or
application, he shall apply for an order discharging the next
friend and for leave to proceed in his own name.
(3) The title of the suit or application shall in such case
be corrected so as to read henceforth thus:-
"A. B., late a minor, by C. D., his next friend, but now
having attained majority.
.
(4) Where he elects to abandon the suit or application, he
shall, if a sole plaintiff or sole applicant, apply for an order to
dismiss the suit or application on repayment of the costs
incurred by the defendant or opposite party or which may have
been paid by his next friend.
(5) Any application under this rule may be made ex parte:
but no order discharging a next friend and permitting a minor
plaintiff to proceed in his own name shall be made without
notice to the next friend.
13. (1) Where a minor co-plaintiff on attaining majority
desires to repudiate the suit, he shall apply to have his name
struck out as co-plaintiff; and the Court, if it finds that he is not
a necessary party, shall dismiss him from the suit on such terms
as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.
Where minor
co-plaintiff
attaining
majority
desires to
repudiate suit
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on the next
friend, on any co-plaintiff and on the defendant.
(3) The costs of all parties of such application, and of all
or any proceedings theretofore had in the suit, shall be paid by
such persons as the Court directs.
(4) Where the applicant is a necessary party to the suit, the
Court may direct him to be made a defendant.
14. (1) A minor on attaining majority may, if a sole
plaintiff, apply that a suit instituted in his name by his next
friend be dismissed on the ground that it was unreasonable or
improper.
Unreasonable
or improper
suit
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on all the
parties concerned; and the Court, upon being satisfied of such
unreasonableness of impropriety, may grant the application and
order the next friend to pay the costs of all parties in respect of
the application and of anything done in the suit, or make such
other order as it thinks fit.
15. The provisions contained in rules 1 to 14, so far as
they are applicable, shall extend to persons adjudged to be or
unsound mind and to persons who though not so adjudged are
found by the Court on inquiry, by reason of unsoundness of
mind or mental infirmity, to be incapable of protecting their
interests when suing or being sued.
Application
of rules to
persons of
unsound mind
.
Saving for
Princess and
Chiefs
16. Nothing in this order shall apply to a Sovereign
Prince or Ruling Chief suing or being sued in the name of his
State, or being sued by direction of the Government in the
name of an agent or in any other name, or shall be construed
to affect or in any way derogate from the provisions of any
local law for the time being in force relating to suits by or
against minors or by or against lunatics or other persons of
unsound mind.
ORDER XXXIII
SUITS BY PAUPERS
Suits may be
instituted in
forma
pauperis
1. Subject to the following provisions, any suit may be
instituted by a pauper.
Explanation.A person is a "pauper" when he is not
possessed of sufficient means to enable him to pay the fee
prescribed by law for the plaint in such suit, or, where no such
fee is prescribed, when he is not entitled to property worth
1
[five thousand Taka] other than his necessary wearingapparel and the subject-matter of the suit.
Contents of
application
2. Every application for permission to sue as a pauper
shall contain the particulars required in regard to plaints in
suits: a schedule of any moveable or immoveable property
belonging to the applicant, with the estimated value thereof,
shall be annexed thereto; and it shall be signed and verified in
the manner prescribed for the signing and verification of
pleadings.
Presentation
of application
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the
application shall be presented to the Court by the applicant in
person, unless he is exempted from appearing in Court, in
which case the application may be presented by an authorised
agent who can answer all material questions relating to the
application, and who may be examined in the same manner as
the party represented by him might have been examined had
such party attended in person.
.

1 The words "five thousand Taka" were substituted, for the words "one hundred Taka"
by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2006 (Act No. VIII of
2006).
4. (1) Where the application is in proper form and duly
presented, the Court may, if it thinks fit, examine the applicant,
or his agent when the applicant is allowed to appear by agent,
regarding the merits of the claim and the property of the
applicant.
Examination
of applicant
(2) Where the application is presented by an agent, the
Court may, if it thinks fit, order that the applicant be examined
by a commission in the manner in which the examination of an
absent witness may be taken.
If presented by
agent, Court
may order
applicant to be
examined by
commission
5. The Court shall reject an application for permission to
sue as a pauper
Rejection of
application
(a) where it is not framed and presented in the manner
prescribed by rules 2 and 3, or
(b) where the applicant is not a pauper, or
(c) where he has, within two months next before the
presentation of the application, disposed of any property
fraudulently or in order to be able to apply for permission
to sue as a pauper, or
(d) where his allegations do not show a cause of action, or
(e) where he has entered into any agreement with reference to
the subject-matter of the proposed suit under which any
other person has obtained an interest in such subjectmatter.
6. Where the Court sees no reason to reject the
application on any of the grounds stated in rule 5, it shall fix a
day (of which at least ten days' clear notice shall be given to the
opposite party and the Government pleader) for receiving such
evidence as the applicant may adduce in proof of his pauperism,
and for hearing any evidence which may be adduced in disproof
thereof.
Notice of day
for receiving
evidence of
applicant's
pauperism
7. (1) On the day so fixed or as soon thereafter as may be
convenient, the Court shall examine the witnesses (if any)
produced by either party, and may examine the applicant or his
agent, and shall make a memorandum of the substance of their
evidence.
Procedure at
hearing
(2) The Court shall also hear any argument which the
parties may desire to offer on the question whether, on the face
of the application and of the evidence (if any) taken by the
Court as herein provided, the applicant is or is not subject to any
of the prohibitions specified in rule 5.
.
(3) The Court shall then either allow or refuse to allow
the applicant to sue as a pauper.
1
[7A. Notwithstanding the provisions of rules 6 and 7,
the Court may directly grant the application, if, upon
furnishing of a certificate by the plaintiff from a local
government representative or its authorized official to the
effect that the plaintiff is a pauper within the meaning of rule
1 of Order XXXIII of the Code, it is satisfied to believe that
the plaintiff is really a pauper.]
Procedure if
application
admitted
8. Where the application is granted, it shall be numbered
and registered, and shall be deemed the plaint in the suit, and
the suit shall proceed in all other respects as a suit instituted in
the ordinary manner, except that the plaintiff shall not be
liable to pay any court-fee (other than fees payable for service
of process) in respect of any petition, appointment of a pleader
or other proceeding connected with the suit.
Dispaupering 9. The Court may, on the application of the defendant, or
of the Government pleader, of which seven days' clear notice
in writing has been given to the plaintiff, order the plaintiff to
be dispaupered
(a) if he is guilty of vexatious or improper conduct in the
course of the suit;
(b) if it appears that his means are such that he ought not to
continue to sue as a pauper; or
(c) if he has entered into any agreement with reference to
the subject-matter of the suit under which any other
person has obtained an interest in such subject-matter.
Costs where
pauper
succeeds
10. Where the plaintiff succeeds in the suit, the Court
shall calculate the amount of court-fees which would have
been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue
as a pauper; such amount shall be recoverable by the
Government from any party ordered by the decree to pay the
same, and shall be a first charge on the subject-matter of the
suit.
.

1 Rule 7A was inserted by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006).
.
 11. Where the plaintiff fails in the suit or is dispaupered,
or where the suit is withdrawn or dismissed,-
Procedure
where pauper
fails
(a) because the summons for the defendant to appear and
answer has not been served upon him in consequence
of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court-fee or
postal charges (if any) chargeable for such service, or
(b) because the plaintiff does not appear when the suit is
called on for hearing,
the Court shall order the plaintiff or any person added as a coplaintiff to the suit, to pay the court-fees which would have been
paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as a
pauper.
1
[11A. Where the suit abates by reason of the death of the
plaintiff or of any person added as a co-plaintiff the Court shall
order that the amount of court-fees which would have been paid
by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as a pauper
shall be recoverable by the Government from the estate of the
deceased plaintiff.]
Procedure
where pauper
suit abates
12. The Government shall have the right at any time to
apply to the Court to make an order for the payment of courtfees under rule 10, rule 11 or rule 11A.
Government
may apply for
payment of
court-fees
13. All matters arising between the Government and any
party to the suit under rule 10, rule 11, rule 11A or rule 12 shall
be deemed to be questions arising between the parties to the suit
within the meaning of section 47.
Government to
be deemed a
party
14. Where an order is made under rule 10, rule 11 or rule
11A the Court shall forthwith cause a copy of the decree or
order to be forwarded to the Collector, who may, without
prejudice to any other mode of recovery, recover the amount of
court-fees specified therein from the person or property liable
for the payment as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Recovery of
amount of
court-fees
15. An order refusing to allow the applicant to sue as a
pauper shall be a bar to any subsequent application of the like
nature by him in respect of the same right to sue; but the
applicant shall be at liberty to institute a suit in the ordinary
manner in respect of such right, provided that he first pays the
Refusal to
allow
applicant to
sue as pauper
to bar
subsequent
.

1 Rule 11A was inserted by section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
1942 (Act No. XXIV of 1942).
application of
like nature
costs (if any) incurred by the Government and by the opposite
party in opposing his application for leave to sue as a pauper.
Costs 16. The costs of an application for permission to sue as a
pauper and of an inquiry into pauperism shall be costs in the
suit.
ORDER XXXIV
SUITS RELATING TO MORTGAGES OF IMMOVEABLE PROPERTY
Parties to
suits for
foreclosure
sale and
redemption
1. Subject to the provisions of this Code, all persons
having an interest either in the mortgage-security or in the right
of redemption shall be joined as parties to any suit relating to
the mortgage.
Explanation.- A puisne mortgage may sue for
foreclosure or for sale without making the prior mortgagee a
party to the suit; and a prior mortgagee need not be joined in a
suit to redeem a subsequent mortgage.
Preliminary
decree in
foreclosure
suit
2. (1) In a suit for foreclosure, if the plaintiff succeeds,
the Court shall pass a preliminary decree -
(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due to the
plaintiff at the date of such decree for-
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage,
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred
by him up to that date in respect of his mortgagesecurity, together with interest thereon; or
(b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and
(c) directing
(i) that, if the defendant pays into Court the amount so
found or declared due on or before such date as the
Court may fix within six months from the date on
which the Court confirms and countersigns the
account taken under clause (a), or from the date on
which such amount is declared in Court under clause
(b), as the case may be, and thereafter pays such
amount as may be adjudged due in respect of
subsequent costs, charges and expenses as provided
in rule 10, together with subsequent interest on such
sums respectively as provided in rule 11, the
plaintiff shall deliver up to the defendant, or to such
person as the defendant appoints, all documents in
his possession or power relating to the mortgaged .
property, and shall, if so required, retransfer the
property to the defendant at his costs free from the
mortgage and from all encumbrances created by the
plaintiff or any person claiming under him, or, where
the plaintiff claims by derived title, by those under
whom he claims, and shall also, if necessary, put the
defendant in possession of the property; and
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due
under or by the preliminary decree is not made on or
before the date so fixed, or the defendant fails to pay,
within such time as the Court may fix, the amount
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges,
expenses and interest, the plaintiff shall be entitled to
apply for a final decree debarring the defendant from
all right to redeem the property.
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms
to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, at any time before a
final decree is passed, extend the time fixed for the payment of
the amount found or declared due under sub-rule (1) or of the
amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges,
expenses and interest.
(3) Where, in a suit for foreclosure, subsequent
mortgagees or persons deriving title from, or subrogated to the
rights of, any such mortgagees are joined as parties, the
preliminary decree shall provide for the adjudication of the
respective rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit in the
manner and form set forth in Form No. 9 or Form No. 10, as the
case may be, of Appendix D with such variations as the
circumstances of the case may require.
3. (1) Where, before a final decree debarring the defendant
from all right to redeem the mortgaged property has been
passed, the defendant makes payment into Court of all amounts
due from him under sub-rule (1) of rule 2, the Court shall, on
application made by the defendant in this behalf, pass a final
decreeFinal decree in
foreclosure
suit
(a) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up the documents referred
to in the preliminary decree,
and, if necessary,-
(b) ordering him to re-transfer at the cost of the defendant the
mortgaged property as directed in the said decree,
.
and, also, if necessary,
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of the
property.
(2) Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has
not been made, the Court shall, on application made by the
plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree declaring that the
defendant and all persons claiming through or under him are
debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property and
also, if necessary, ordering the defendant to put the plaintiff in
possession of the property.
(3) On the passing of a final decree under sub-rule (2), all
liabilities to which the defendant is subject in respect of the
mortgage or on account of the suit shall be deemed to have
been discharged.
Preliminary
decree in suit
for sale
4. (1) In a suit for sale, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court
shall pass a preliminary decree to the effect mentioned in
clauses (a), (b) and (c) (i) of sub-rule (1) of rule 2, and further
directing that, in default of the defendant paying as therein
mentioned, the plaintiff shall be entitled to apply for a final
decree directing that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part
thereof be sold, and the proceeds of the sale (after deduction
therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and
applied in payment of what has been found or declared under
or by the preliminary decree due to the plaintiff, together with
such amount as may have been adjudged due in respect of
subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest, and the
balance, if any, be paid to the defendant or other persons
entitled to receive the same.
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms
to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, at any time before a
final decree for sale is passed, extend the time fixed for the
payment of the amount found or declared due under sub-rule
(1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent
costs, charges, expenses and interest.
Power to
decree sale in
foreclosure suit
(3) In a suit for foreclosure in the case of an anomalous
mortgage, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court may, at the
instance of any party to the suit or of any other person
interested in the mortgage-security or the right of redemption,
.
pass a like decree (in lieu of a decree for foreclosure) on such
terms as it thinks fit, including the deposit in Court of a
reasonable sum fixed by the Court to meet the expenses of the
sale and to secure the performance of the terms.
(4) Where, in a suit for sale or a suit for foreclosure in
which sale is ordered, subsequent mortgagees or persons
deriving title from, or subrogated to the rights of, any such
mortgagees are joined as parties, the preliminary decree referred
to in sub-rule (1) shall provide for the adjudication of the
respective rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit in the
manner and form set forth in Form No. 9, Form No. 10 or Form
No. 11, as the case may be, of Appendix D with such variations
as the circumstances of the case may require.
5. (1) Where, on or before the day fixed or at any time
before the confirmation of a sale made in pursuance of a final
decree passed under sub-rule (3) of this rule, the defendant
makes payment into Court of all amounts due from him under
sub-rule (1) of rule 4, the Court shall, on application made by
the defendant in this behalf, pass a final decree or, if such
decree has been passed, an orderFinal decree in
suit for sale
(a) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up the documents referred
to in the preliminary decree,
and, if necessary,
(b) ordering him to transfer the mortgaged property as
directed in the said decree,
and, also, if necessary,
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of the
property.
(2) Where the mortgaged property or part thereof has been
sold in pursuance of a decree passed under sub-rule (3) of this
rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub-rule (1) of this
rule, unless the defendant, in addition to the amount mentioned
in sub-rule (1), deposits in Court for payment to the purchaser a
sum equal to five per cent of the amount of the purchase-money
paid into Court by the purchaser.
.
Where such deposits have been made, the purchaser
shall be entitled to an order for repayment of the amount of
the purchase-money paid into Court by him, together with a
sum equal to five per cent thereof.
(3) Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has
not been made, the Court shall, on application made by the
plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree directing that the
mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and
that the proceeds of the sale be dealt with in the manner
provided in sub-rule (1) of rule 4.
Recovery of
balance due
on mortgage
in suit for sale
6. Where the net proceeds of any sale held under the last
preceding rule are found insufficient to pay the amount due to
the plaintiff, the Court, on application by him may, if the
balance is legally recoverable from the defendant otherwise
than out of the property sold, pass a decree for such balance.
Preliminary
decree in
redemption
suit
7. (1) In a suit for redemption, if the plaintiff succeeds,
the Court shall pass a preliminary decree
(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due to
the defendant at the date of such decree for
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage,
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred
by him up to that date, in respect of his
mortgage-security, together with interest thereon; or
(b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and
(c) directing
(i) that, if the plaintiff pays into Court the amount so
found or declared due on or before such date as the
Court may fix within six months from the date on
which the Court confirms and countersigns the
account taken under clause (a), or from the date on
which such amount is declared in Court under
clause (b), as the case may be, and thereafter pays
such amount as may be adjudged due in respect of
subsequent costs, charges and expenses as
provided in rule 10, together with subsequent
interest on such sums respectively as provided in .
rule 11, the defendant shall deliver up to the plaintiff, or
to such person as the plaintiff appoints, all documents in
his possession or power relating to the mortgaged
property, and shall, if so required, re-transfer the
property to the plaintiff at his cost free from the
mortgaged and from all encumbrances created by the
defendant or any person claiming under him, or, where
the defendant claims by derived title, by those under
whom he claims, and shall also, if necessary, put the
plaintiff in possession of the property; and
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due
under or by the preliminary decree is not made on or
before the date so fixed, or the plaintiff fails to pay,
within such time as the Court may fix, the amount
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges,
expenses and interests, the defendant shall be entitled to
apply for a final decree
(a) in the case of a mortgage other than a usufructuary
mortgage, a mortgage by conditional sale, or an
anomalous mortgage the terms of which provide for
foreclosure only and not for sale, that the
mortgaged property be sold, or
(b) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or
such an anomalous mortgage as aforesaid, that the
plaintiff be debarred from all right to redeem the
property.
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms
to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, at any time before
the passing of a final decree for foreclosure or sale, as the case
may be, extend the time fixed for the payment of the amount
found or declared due under sub-rule (1) or of the amount
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses
and interest.
8. (1) Where, before a final decree debarring the plaintiff
from all right to redeem the mortgaged property has been
passed or before the confirmation of a sale help in pursuance of
a final decree passed under sub-rule (3) of this rule, the plaintiff
makes payment into Court of all amounts due from him under
sub-rule (1) of rule 7, the Court shall, on application made by
the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree or, if such decree
has been passed, an orderFinal decree in
redemption suit
.
(a) ordering the defendant to deliver up the documents
referred to in the preliminary decree,
and, if necessary,
(b) ordering him to re-transfer at the cost of the plaintiff
the mortgaged property as directed in the said decree,
and, also, if necessary,
(c) ordering him to put the plaintiff in possession of the
property.
(2) Where the mortgaged property or a part thereof has
been sold in pursuance of a decree passed under sub-rule (3)
of this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub-rule
(1) of this rule, unless the plaintiff, in addition to the amount
mentioned in sub-rule (1), deposits in Court for payment to the
purchaser a sum equal to five per cent of the amount of the
purchase-money paid into Court by the purchaser.
Where such deposits have been made, the purchaser
shall be entitled to an order for repayment of the amount of
the purchase-money paid into Court by him, together with a
sum equal to five per cent. thereof.
(3) Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has
not been made, the Court shall, on application made by the
defendant in this behalf,
(a) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or of
such an anomalous mortgage as is hereinbefore
referred to in rule 7, pass a final decree declaring that
the plaintiff and all persons claiming under him are
debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged
property and also, if necessary, ordering the plaintiff
to put the defendant in possession of the mortgaged
property; or
(b) in the case of any other mortgage, not being a
usufructuary mortgage, pass a final decree that the
mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be
sold, and the proceeds of the sale (after deduction
therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into
Court and applied in payment of what is found due to
the defendant, and the balance, if any, be paid to the
plaintiff or other persons entitled to receive the same.
.
1
[8A. Where the net proceeds of any sale held under the
last preceding rule are found insufficient to pay the amount due
to the defendant, the Court, on application by him, may, if the
balance is legally recoverable from the plaintiff otherwise than
out of the property sold, pass a decree for such balance.]
Recovery of
balance due on
mortgage in
suit for
redemption
9. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, if it
appears, upon taking the account referred to in rule 7, that
nothing is due to the defendant or that he has been overpaid, the
Court shall pass a decree directing the defendant, if so required,
to re-transfer the property and to pay to the plaintiff the amount
which may be found due to him: and the plaintiff shall, if
necessary, be put in possession of the mortgaged property.
Decree where
nothing is
found due or
where
mortgagee has
been overpaid
10. In finally adjusting the amount to be paid to a
mortgagee in case of a foreclosure, sale or redemption, the
Court shall, unless in the case of costs or the suit the conduct of
the mortgagee has been such as to disentitle him thereto, add to
the mortgage-money such costs of the suit and other costs,
charges and expenses as have been properly incurred by him
since the date of the preliminary decree for foreclosure, sale or
redemption up to the time of actual payment.
Costs of
mortgagee
subsequent to
decree
11. In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure, sale or
redemption, where interest is legally recoverable, the Court may
order payment of interest to the mortgagee as follows, namely:
Payment of
interest
(a) interest up to the date on or before which payment of
the amount found or declared due is under the
preliminary decree to be made by the mortgagor or
other person redeeming the mortgage
(i) on the principal amount found or declared due
on the mortgage,-at the rate payable on the
principal, or, where no such rate is fixed, at
such rate as the Court deems reasonable,
(ii) on the amount of the costs of the suit awarded
to the mortgagee, at such rate as the Court
deems reasonable from the date of the
preliminary decree, and
.

1 Rule 8A was inserted by section 5 of the Transfer of Property (Amendment)
Supplementary Act, 1929 (Act No. XXI of 1929).
(iii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee for
costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by
the mortgagee in respect of the mortgage-security
up to the date of the preliminary decree and added
to the mortgage money,at the rate agreed
between the parties, or, failing such rate, at the
same rate as is payable on the principal, or failing
both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum; and
(b) subsequent interest up to the date of realization or
actual payment at such rate as the Court deems
reasonable
(i) on the aggregate of the principal sums specified
in clause (a) and of the interest thereon as
calculated in accordance with that clause; and
(ii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee in
respect of such further costs, charges and
expenses as may be payable under rule 10.
Sale of
property
subject to
prior
mortgage
12. Where any property the sale of which directed under
this Order is subject to a prior mortgage, the Court may, with
the consent of the prior mortgagee, direct that the property be
sold free from the same, giving to such prior mortgagee the
same interest in the proceeds of the sale as he had in the
property sold.
Application of
proceeds
13. (1) Such proceeds shall be brought into Court and
applied as follows:
firstly, in payment of all expenses incident to the sale or
properly incurred in any attempted sale;
secondly, in payment of whatever is due to the prior
mortgagee on account of the prior mortgage, and
costs, properly incurred in connection therewith;
thirdly, in payment of all interest due on account of the
mortgage in consequence whereof the sale was
directed, and of the costs of the suit in which the
decree directing the sale was made;
fourthly, the payment of the principal money due on
account of that mortgage; and .
lastly, the residue (if any) shall be paid to the person
proving himself to be interested in the property
sold, or if there are more such persons than one,
then to such persons according to their respective
interests therein or upon their joint receipt.
(2) Nothing in this rule or in rule 12 shall be deemed to
affect the powers conferred by section 57 of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882.
14. (1) Where a mortgagee has obtained a decree for the
payment of money in satisfaction of a claim arising under the
mortgage, he shall not be entitled to bring the mortgaged
property to sale otherwise than by instituting a suit for sale in
enforcement of the mortgage, and he may institute such suit
notwithstanding anything contained in Order II, rule 2.
Suit for sale
necessary for
bringing
mortgaged
property to
sale
(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall apply to any territories to
which the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, has not been
extended.
15. All the provisions contained in this Order which apply
to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to a
mortgage by deposit of title-deeds within the meaning of section
58, and to a charge within the meaning of section 100 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
Mortgages by
the deposit of
title-deeds and
charges
ORDER XXXV
INTERPLEADER
1. In every suit of interpleader the plaint shall, in addition
to other statements necessary for plaints, statePlaint in
interpleadersuits
(a) that the plaintiff claims no interest in the subject-matter
in dispute other than for charges or costs;
(b) the claims made by the defendants severally; and
(c) that there is no collusion between the plaintiff and any
of the defendants.
2. Where the thing claimed is capable of being paid into
Court or placed in the custody of the Court, the plaintiff may be
required to so pay or place it before he can be entitled to any
order in the suit.
Payment of
thing claimed
into Court
3. Where any of the defendants in an interpleader-suit is
actually suing the plaintiff in respect of the subject-matter of
such suit, the Court in which the suit against the plaintiff is
Procedure
where
defendant is
.
.
suing plaintiff pending shall, on being informed by the Court in which the
interpleader-suit has been instituted, stay the proceedings as
against him; and his costs in the suit so stayed may be
provided for in such suit; but if, and in so far as, they are not
provided for in that suit, they may be added to his costs
incurred in the interpleader-suit.
Procedure at
first hearing
4. (1) At the first hearing the Court may-
(a) declare that the plaintiff is discharged from all liability
to the defendants in respect of the thing claimed award
him his costs, and dismiss him from the suit; or
(b) if it thinks that justice or convenience so require,
retain all parties until the final disposal of the suit.
(2) Where the Court finds that the admissions of the
parties or other evidence enable it to do so, it may adjudicate
the title to the thing claimed.
(3) Where the admissions of the parties do not enable the
Court so to adjudicate, it may direct-
(a) that an issue or issues between the parties be framed
and tried, and
(b) that any claimant be made a plaintiff in lieu of or in
addition to the original plaintiff,
and shall proceed to try the suit in the ordinary manner.
Agents and
tenants may
not institute
interpleadersuits
5. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to enable
agents to sue their principals, or tenants to sue their landlords,
for the purpose of compelling them to interplead with any
person other than persons making claim through such
principals or landlords.
Illustrations
(a) A deposit a box of jewels with B as his agent. C alleges that
the jewels were wrongfully obtained from him by A, and claims them
from B. B cannot institute an interpleader-suit against A and C.
(b) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. He then
writes to C for the purpose of making the jewels a security for a debt
due from himself to C. A afterwards alleges that C's debt is satisfied,
and C alleges the contrary. Both claim the jewels from B. B may
institute an interpleader-suit against A and C.
.
6. Where the suit is properly instituted the Court may
provide for the costs of the original plaintiff by giving him a
charge on the thing claimed or in some other effectual way.
Charge for
plaintiff's costs
ORDER XXXVI
SPECIAL CASE
1. (1) Parties claiming to be interested in the decisions of
any question of fact or law may enter into an agreement in
writing stating such question in the form of a case for the
opinion of the Court, and providing that, upon the finding of the
Court with respect to such question,
Power to state
case for
Court's
opinion
(a) a sum of money fixed by the parties or to be determined
by the Court shall be paid by one of the parties to the
other of them; or
(b) some property, moveable or immoveable, specified in
the agreement, shall be delivered by one of the parties to
the other of them; or
(c) one or more of the parties shall do, or refrain from
doing, some other particular act specified in the
agreement.
(2) Every case stated under this rule shall be divided into
consecutively numbered paragraphs, and shall concisely state
such facts and specify such documents as may be necessary to
enable the Court to decide the question raised thereby.
2. Where the agreement is for the delivery of any property,
or for the doing, or the refraining from doing, any particular act,
the estimated value of the property to be delivered, or to which
the act specified has reference, shall be stated in the agreement.
Where value
of subjectmatter must be
stated
3. (1) The agreement, if framed in accordance with the
rules hereinbefore contained, may be filed in the Court which
would have jurisdiction to entertain a suit, the amount or value
of the subject-matter of which is the same as the amount or
value of the subject-matter of the agreement.
Agreement to
be filed and
registered as
suit
(2) The agreement when so filed, shall be numbered and
registered as a suit between one or more of the parties claiming
to be interested as plaintiff or plaintiffs, and the other or the
others of them as defendant or defendants; and notice shall be
given to all the parties to the agreement, other than the party or
parties by whom it was presented.
.
Parties to be
subject to
Court's
jurisdiction
4. Where the agreement has been filed, the parties to it
shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Court and shall be
bound by the statements contained therein.
Hearing and
disposal of
case
5. (1) The case shall be set down for hearing as a suit
instituted in the ordinary manner, and the provisions of this
Code shall apply to such suits so far as the same are
applicable.
(2) Where the Court is satisfied, after examination of the
parties or after taking such evidence as it thinks fit,
(a) that the agreement was duly executed by them,
(b) that they have a bona fide interest in the question
stated therein, and
(c) that the same, is fit to be decided,
it shall proceed to pronounce judgment thereon, in the same
way as in an ordinary suit, and upon the judgment so
pronounced a decree shall follow.
ORDER XXXVII
SUMMARY PROCEDURE ON NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
Application
of Order
1. This Order shall apply only to the High Court
Division and to the District Court.
Institution of
summary suits
upon bills of
exchange, etc.
2. (1) All suits upon bills of exchange, hundies or
promissory notes may, in case the plaintiff desires to proceed
hereunder, be instituted by presenting a plaint in the form
prescribed; but the summons shall be in Form No. 4 in
Appendix B or in such other form as may be from time to time
prescribed.
(2) In any case which the plaint and summons are in
such forms, respectively the defendant shall not appear or
defend the suit unless he obtains leave from a Judge as
hereinafter provided so to appear and defend; and, in default
of his obtaining such leave or of his appearance and defence in
pursuance thereof, the allegations in the plaint shall be
deemed to be admitted, and the plaintiff shall be entitled to a
decree-
.
(a) for the principal sum due on the instrument and for interest
calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 79
or section 80, as the case may be, of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881, up to the date of the institution of
the suit, or for the sum mentioned in the summons,
whichever is less, and for interest up to the date of the
decree at the same rate or at such other rate as the Court
thinks fit; and
(b) for such subsequent interest, if any, as the Court may order
under section 34 of this Code; and
(c) for such sum for costs as may be prescribed:
Provided that, if the plaintiff claims more than such fixed
sum for costs, the costs shall be ascertained in the ordinary way.
(3) A decree passed under this rule may be executed
forthwith.
3. (1) The Court shall, upon application by the defendant,
give leave to appear and to defend the suit, upon affidavits which
disclose such facts as would make it incumbent on the holder to
prove consideration, or such other facts as the court may deem
sufficient to support the application.
Defendant
showing
defence on
merits to have
leave to appear
(2) Leave to defend may be given unconditionally or
subject to such terms as to payment into court, giving security,
framing and recording issues or otherwise as the Court thinks fit.
4. After decree the Court may, under special circumstances,
set aside the decree, and if necessary stay or set aside execution,
and may give leave to the defendant to appear to the summons
and to defend the suit, if it seems reasonable to the Court so to
do, and on such terms as the Court thinks fit.
Power to set
aside decree
5. In any proceeding under this Order the Court may order
the bill, hundi or note on which the suit is founded to be
forthwith deposited with an officer of the Court, and may further
order that all proceedings shall be stayed until the plaintiff gives
security for the costs thereof.
Power to order
bill, etc., to be
deposited with
officer of Court
.
Recovery of
cost of noting
nonacceptance of
dishonoured
bill or note
6. The holder of every dishonoured bill of exchange or
promissory note shall have the same remedies for the recovery
of the expenses incurred in noting the same for nonacceptance or non-payment, or otherwise, by reason of such
dishonour, as he has under this Order for the recovery of the
amount of such bill or note.
Procedure in
suits
7. Save as provided by this Order, the procedure in suits
hereunder shall be the same as the procedure in suits instituted
in the ordinary manner.
ORDER XXXVIII
ARREST AND ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT
Arrest before Judgment
Where
defendant
may be called
upon to
furnish
security for
appearance
1. Where at any stage of a suit, other than a suit of the
nature referred to in section 16, clauses (a) to (d), the Court is
satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise,-
(a) that the defendant, with intend to delay the plaintiff, or
to avoid any process of the Court or to obstruct or
delay the execution of any decree that may be passed
against him,
(i) has absconded or left the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the Court, or
(ii) is about to abscond or leave the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the Court, or
(iii) has disposed of or removed from the local limits
of the jurisdiction of the Court his property or any
part thereof, or
(b) that the defendant is about to leave Bangladesh under
circumstances affording reasonable probability that
the plaintiff will or may thereby be obstructed or
delayed in the execution of any decree that may be
passed against the defendant in the suit,
the Court may issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and
bring him before the Court to show cause why he should not
furnish security for his appearance:
.
Provided that the defendant shall not be arrested if he pays
to the officer entrusted with the execution of the warrant any
sum specified in the warrant as sufficient to satisfy the
plaintiff's claim; and such sum shall be held in deposit by the
Court until the suit is disposed of or until the further order of
the Court.
2. (1) Where the defendant fails to show such cause the
Court shall order him either to deposit in Court money or other
property sufficient to answer the claim against him, or to furnish
security for his appearance at any time when called upon while
the suit is pending and until satisfaction of any decree that may
be passed against him in the suit, or make such order as it thinks
fit in regard to the sum which may have been paid by the
defendant under the proviso to the last preceding rule.
Security
(2) Every surety for the appearance of a defendant shall
bind himself, in default of such appearance, to pay any sum of
money which the defendant may be ordered to pay in the suit.
3. (1) A surety for the appearance of a defendant may at
any time apply to the Court in which he become such surety to
be discharged from his obligation.
Procedure on
application by
surety to be
discharged
(2) On such application being made, the Court shall
summon the defendant to appear or, if it thinks fit, may issue a
warrant for his arrest in the first instance.
(3) On the appearance of the defendant in pursuance of the
summons or warrant, or on his voluntary surrender, the Court
shall direct the surety to be discharged from his obligation, and
shall call upon the defendant to find fresh security.
4. Where the defendant fails to comply with any order
under rule 2 or rule 3, the Court may commit him to the civil
prison until the decision of the suit or, where a decree is passed
against the defendant, until the decree has been satisfied:
Procedure
where
defendant fails
to furnish
security or
find fresh
security
Provided that no person shall be detained in prison under
this rule in any case for a longer period than six months, nor for
a longer period than six weeks when the amount or value of the
subject-matter of the suit does not exceed fifty Taka:
Provided also that no person shall be detained in prison
under this rule after he has complied with such order.
.
Attachment before Judgment
Where
defendant
may be called
upon to
furnish
security for
production of
property
5. (1) Where, at any stage of a suit, the Court is satisfied,
by affidavit or otherwise, that the defendant, with intend to
obstruct or delay the execution of any decree that may be
passed against him,
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his
property, or
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his
property from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the
Court,
the Court may direct the defendant, within a time to be fixed
by it, either to furnish security, in such sum as may be
specified in the order, to produce and place at the disposal of
the Court, when required, the said property or the value of the
same, or such portion thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy
the decree, or to appear and show cause why he should not
furnish security.
(2) The plaintiff shall, unless the Court otherwise
directs, specify the property required to be attached and the
estimated value thereof.
(3) The Court may also in the order direct the
conditional attachment of the whole or any portion of the
property so specified.
Attachment
where cause
not shown or
security not
furnished
6. (1) where the defendant fails to show cause why he
should not furnish security, or fails to furnish the security
required, within the time fixed by the Court, the Court may
order that the property specified, or such portion thereof as
appears sufficient to satisfy any decree which may be passed
in the suit, be attached.
(2) Where the defendant shows such cause or furnishes
the required security, and the property specified or any portion
of it has been attached, the Court shall order the attachment to
be withdrawn, or make such order as it thinks fit.
Mode of
making
attachments
7. Save as otherwise expressly provided, the attachment
shall be made in the manner provided for the attachment of
property in execution of a decree.
.
8. Where any claim is preferred to property attached
before judgment, such claim shall be investigated in the manner
hereinbefore provided for the investigation of claims to property
attached in execution of a decree for the payment of money.
Investigation
of claim to
property
attached
before
judgment
9. Where an order is made for attachment before
judgment, the Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn
when the defendant furnishes the security required, together
with security for the costs of the attachment, or when the suit is
dismissed.
Removal of
attachment
when security
furnished or
suit dismissed
10. Attachment before judgment shall not affect the rights,
existing prior to the attachment, of persons not parties to the
suit, nor bar any person holding a decree against the defendant
from applying for the sale of the property under attachment in
execution of such decree.
Attachment
before
judgment not
to affect rights
of strangers
nor bar decreeholder from
applying for
sale
11. Where property is under attachment by virtue of the
provisions of this Order and a decree is subsequently passed in
favour of the plaintiff, it shall not be necessary upon an
application for execution of such decree to apply for a reattachment of the property.
Property
attached
before
judgment not
to be reattached in
execution of
decree
12. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to authorise the
plaintiff to apply for the attachment of any agricultural produce
in the possession of an agriculturist, or to empower the Court to
order the attachment or production of such produce.
Agricultural
produce not
attachable
before
judgment
13. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to empower any
Court of Small Causes to make an order for the attachment of
immoveable property.
Small Cause
Court not to
attach
immoveable
property .
ORDER XXXIX
TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS
Temporary Injunctions
Cases in which
temporary
injunction may
be granted
1. Where in any suit it is proved by affidavit or
otherwise
(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of
being wasted, damaged or alienated by any party to
the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a
decree, or
(b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove
or dispose of his property with a view to defraud his
creditors,
the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to
restrain such act, or make such other order for the purpose of
staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation,
sale, removal or disposition of the property as the Court
thinks fit, until the disposal of the suit or until further orders.
Injunction to
restrain
repetition or
continuance
of breach
2. (1) In any suit for restraining the defendant from
committing a breach of contract or other injury of any kind,
whether compensation is claimed in the suit or not, the
plaintiff may, at any time after the commencement of the
suit, and either before or after judgment, apply to the Court
for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from
committing the breach of contract or injury complained of,
or any breach of contract or injury of a like kind arising out
of the same contract or relating to the same property or right.
(2) The Court may by order grant such injunction, on
such terms, as to the duration of the injunction, keeping an
account, giving security or otherwise, as the Court thinks fit.
(3) In case of disobedience, or of breach of any such
terms, the Court granting an injunction may order the
property of the person guilty of such disobedience or breach
to be attached, and may also order such person to be
detained in the civil prison for a term not exceeding six
months, unless in the meantime the Court directs his release.
(4) No attachment under this rule shall remain in force
for more than one year, at the end of which time, if the
disobedience or breach continues, the property attached may
be sold, and out of the proceeds the Court may award such
compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the balance, if
any, to the party entitled thereto.
.
3. The Court shall in all cases, before granting an
injunction, direct notice of the application for the same to be
given to the opposite party 1
[and be satisfied that notice has
been duly served, or could not be served on account of refusal
by the opposite party to receive, or otherwise]:
Before
granting
injunction
Court to direct
notice to
opposite party
Provided that, except in the case of sale of goods for
default in payment, at the stipulated time, of a debt in respect of
which the goods were pledged with any bank, the Court may,
where it appears that the object of granting injunction would be
defeated by the delay, dispense with such notice.
2
[3A. Any notice directed to be served under rule 3 shall
be returned, with or without service, to the Court within seven
days of issuance; and if the notice is returned without service,
the Court shall cause the notice to be served again within seven
days thereof in accordance with the provision of rule 20 of
Order V, so far as may be applicable, and such service shall be
deemed as due service of the notice.]
Mode of
service of
unserved
returned
notices
4. Any order for an injunction may be discharged, or
varied, or set aside by the Court, on application made thereto by
any party dissatisfied with such order.
Order for
injunction may
be discharged,
varied or set
aside
5. An injunction directed to a corporation is binding not
only on the corporation itself, but also on all members and
officers of the corporation whose personal action it seeks to
restrain.
Injunction to
corporation
binding on its
officers
3
[5A. (1) Court shall not, without serving reasonable
notice to the Government Pleader and giving him or any Pleader
authorised by him in that behalf an opportunity of being heard,
pass ex parte any order of ad interim or temporary injunction
under any of the aforesaid rules of this Order at the instance of a
private party against the Government or any statutory public
authority, if such order is likely to prejudice or interfere with
No order of ad
interim or
temporary
injunction
without
hearing the
opposite party

1 The words and commas " and be satisfied that notice has been duly served, or could
not be served on account of refusal by the opposite party to receive, or otherwise"
were inserted by section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment) Act,
2003 (Act No. XL of 2003).
2 Rule 3A was inserted by section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment)
Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003).
3 Rule 5A was inserted by section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Third Amendment)
Act, 2003 (Act No. XL of 2003).
Any measure designed to implement any development
programme, or any development work or otherwise harm
public interest.
(2) The Court shall, in all cases where a private party
makes an application for ad interim or temporary injunction
against another private party, direct notice of the application to
the opposite party, unless it appears that the object or granting
the injunction would be defeated by the delay.
(3) If any order of ad interim or temporary injunction is
passed ex-parte at the instance of a private party against
another private party, the Court shall hear and dispose of the
matter on merit within seven days of appearance of the
opposite party, unless the period is extended further at the
instance of the opposite party; and any such order of ad interim
or temporary injunction shall stand vacated, if the party at
whose instance it was passed, prays for adjournment, or on
being called upon by the Court, fails to attend hearing.
(4) If the suit is ultimately decided against the party at
whose instance an ad interim or temporary injunction is
granted, and it appears that on account of such injunction the
other party has suffered loss, the Court, while deciding the suit
shall award such compensatory cost not exceeding ten
thousand taka in favour of that other party, in addition to other
cost as he may be entitle to.
(5) The cost awarded under sub-rule (4) shall not
disentitle the party, if he is otherwise entitled to, to claim
further compensation, on account of any loss which he may
have suffered due to grant of temporary injunction; but such
cost received under sub-rule (4) shall be taken into account if
such further compensation is claimed.]
Interlocutory Orders
Power to order
interim sale
6. The Court may, on the application of any party to a
suit, order the sale, by any person named in such order, and in
such manner and on such terms as it thinks fit, of any moveable
property, being the subject-matter of such suit, or attached
before judgment in such suit, which is subject to speedy and
natural decay, or which for any other just and sufficient cause
it may be desirable to have sold at once.
.
7. (1) The Court may, on the application of any party to a
suit, and on such terms as it thinks fit,
(a) make an order for the detention, preservation or
inspection of any property which is the subject-matter of
such suit, or as to which any question may arise therein;
Detention,
preservation,
inspection,
etc., of
subject-matter
of suit
(b) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any
person to enter upon or into any land or building in the
possession of any other party to such suit; and
(c) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any
samples to be taken, or any observation to be made or
experiment to be tried, which may seem necessary or
expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information
or evidence.
(2) The provisions as to execution of process shall apply,
mutatis mutandis, to persons authorised to enter under this rule.
8. (1) An application by the plaintiff for an order under
rule 6 or rule 7 may be made after notice to the defendant at any
time after institution of the suit.
Application
for such orders
to be after
notice
(2) An application by the defendant for a like order may
be made after notice to the plaintiff at any time after
appearance.
9. Where land paying revenue to Government, or a tenure
liable to sale, is the subject-matter of a suit, if the party in
possession of such land or tenure neglects to pay the
Government revenue, or the rent due to the proprietor of the
tenure, as the case may be, and such land or tenure is
consequently ordered to be sold, any other party to the suit
claiming to have an interest in such land or tenure may, upon
payment of the revenue or rent due previously to the sale (and
with or without security at the discretion of the Court), be put in
immediate possession of the land or tenure;
When party
may be put in
immediate
possession of
land the
subject-matter
of suit
and the Court in its decree may award against the defaulter
the amount so paid, with interest thereon at such rate as the
Court thinks fit, or may charge the amount so paid, with interest
thereon at such rate as the Court orders, in any adjustment of
accounts which may be directed in the decree passed in the suit.
10. Where the subject-matter of a suit is money or some
other thing capable of delivery, and any party thereto admits
that he holds such money or other thing as a trustee for another
party, or that it belongs or is due to another party, the Court may
order the same to be deposited in Court or delivered to such
last-named party, with or without security, subject to the further
direction of the Court.
Deposit of
money, etc., in
Court
.
ORDER XL
APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVERS
Appointments
of receivers
1. (1) Where it appears to the Court to be just and
convenient, the Court may by order
(a) appoint a receiver of any property, whether before or
after decree;
(b) remove any person from the possession or custody of
the property;
(c) commit the same to the possession, custody or
management of the receiver; and
(d) confer upon the receiver all such powers, as to
bringing and defending suits and for the realization,
management, protection, preservation and improvement of the property, the collection of the rents and
profits thereof, the application and disposal of such
rents and profits, and the execution of documents as
the owner himself has, or such of those powers as the
Court thinks fit.
(2) Nothing in this rule shall authorise the Court to
remove from the possession or custody of property any person
whom any party to the suit has not a present right so to remove.
Remuneration 2. The Court may by general or special order fix the
amount to be paid as remuneration for the services of the
receiver.
Duties 3. Every receiver so appointed shall
(a) furnish such security (if any) as the Court thinks fit,
duly to account for what he shall receive in respect of
the property;
(b) submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as
the Court directs;
(c) pay the amount due from him as the Court directs; and
(d) be responsible for any loss occasioned to the property
by his wilful default or gross negligence.
Enforcement
of receiver's
duties
4. Where a receiver
(a) fails to submit his accounts at such periods and in such
form as the Court directs, or
(b) fails to pay the amount due from him as the Court
directs, or
.
(c) occasions loss to the property by his wilful default or
gross negligence,
the Court may direct his property to be attached and may sell
such property, and may apply the proceeds to make good any
amount found to be due from him or any loss occasioned by
him, and shall pay the balance (if any) to the receiver.
5. Where the property is land paying revenue to the
Government, or land of which the revenue has been assigned or
redeemed, and the Court considers that the interest of those
concerned will be promoted by the management of the
Collector, the Court may, with the consent of the Collector,
appoint him to be receiver of such property.
When
Collector may
be appointed
receiver
ORDER XLI
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES
1. (1) Every appeal shall be preferred in the form of a
memorandum signed by the appellant or his pleader and
presented to the Court or to such officer as it appoints in this
behalf. The memorandum shall be accompanied by a copy of the
decree appealed from and (unless the Appellate Court dispenses
therewith) of the Judgment on which it is founded.
Form of
appeal. What
to accompany
memorandum
(2) The memorandum shall set forth, concisely and under
distinct heads, the grounds of objection to the decree appealed
from without any argument or narrative; and such grounds shall
be numbered consecutively.
Contents of
memorandum
2. The appellant shall not, except by leave of the Court,
urge or be heard in support of any ground of objection not set
forth in the memorandum of appeal; but the Appellate Court, in
deciding the appeal, shall not be confined to the grounds of
objection set forth in the memorandum of appeal or taken by
leave of the Court under this rule:
Grounds
which may be
taken in appeal
Provided that the Court shall not rest its decision on any
other ground unless the party who may be affected thereby has
had a sufficient opportunity of contesting the case on that
ground.
3. (1) Where the memorandum of appeal is not drawn up
in the manner hereinbefore prescribed, it may be rejected, or be
returned to the appellant for the purpose of being amended
within a time to be fixed by the Court or to be amended then
and there.
Rejection or
amendment of
memorandum
.
(2) Where the Court rejects any memorandum, it shall
record the reasons for such rejection.
(3) Where a memorandum of appeal is amended, the
Judge, or such officer as he appoints in this behalf, shall sign
or initial the amendment.
One of several
plaintiffs of
defendants
may obtain
reversal of
whole decree
where it
proceeds on
ground
common to all
4. Where there are more plaintiffs or more defendants
than one in a suit, and the decree appealed from proceeds on
any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the
defendants, any one of the plaintiffs or of the defendants may
appeal from the whole decree, and thereupon the Appellate
Court may reverse or vary the decree in favour of all the
plaintiffs or defendants, as the case may be.
Stay of Proceedings and of Execution
Stay by
Appellate
Court
5. (1) An appeal shall not operate as a stay of
proceedings under a decree or order appealed from except so
far as the Appellate Court may order, nor shall execution of a
decree be stayed by reason only of an appeal having been
preferred from the decree; but the Appellate Court may for
sufficient cause order stay of execution of such decree.
Stay by Court
which passed
the decree
(2) Where an application is made for stay of execution
of an appealable decree before the expiration of the time
allowed for appealing therefrom, the Court which passed the
decree may on sufficient cause being shown order the
execution to be stayed.
(3) No order for stay of execution shall be made under
sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) unless the Court making it is
satisfied-
(a) that substantial loss may result to the party applying for
stay of execution unless the order is made;
(b) that the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and
(c) that security has been given by the applicant for the due
performance of such decree or order as may ultimately
be binding upon him.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (3),
the Court may make an ex parte order for stay of execution
pending the hearing of the application.
.
6. (1) Where an order is made for the execution of a
decree from which an appeal is pending, the Court which
passed the decree shall, on sufficient cause being shown by the
appellant, require security to be taken for the restitution of any
property which may be or has been taken in execution of the
decree or for the payment of the value of such property and for
the due performance of the decree or order of the Appellate
Court, or the Appellate Court may for like cause direct the
Court which passed the decree to take such security.
Security in case
of order for
execution of
decree appealed
from
(2) Where an order has been made for the sale of
immoveable property in execution of a decree, and an appeal is
pending from such decree, the sale shall, on the application of
the judgment debtor to the Court which made the order, be
stayed on such terms as to giving security or otherwise as the
Court thinks fit until the appeal is disposed of.
7. [Repealed by the Government of India (Adaptation of
Indian Laws) Order, 1937.]
8. The powers conferred by rules 5 and 6 shall be
exercisable where an appeal may be or has been preferred not
from the decree but from an order made in execution of such
decree.
Exercise of
powers in appeal
from order made
in execution of
decree
Procedure on Admission of Appeal
9. (1) Where a memorandum of appeal is admitted, the
Appellate Court or the proper officer of that Court shall endorse
thereon the date of presentation, and shall register the appeal in
a book to be kept for the purpose.
Registry of
memorandum of
appeal
(2) Such book shall be called the Register of Appeals. Register of
Appeals
10. (1) The Appellate Court may, in its discretion, either
before the respondent is called upon to appear and answer or
afterwards on the application of the respondent, demand from
the appellant security for the costs of the appeal, or of the
original suit, or of both:
Appellate Court
may require
appellant to
furnish security
for costs
Provided that the Court shall demand such security in all
cases in which the appellant is residing out of Bangladesh, and
is not possessed of any sufficient immoveable property within
Bangladesh other than the property (if any) to which the appeal
relates.
Where appellant
resides out of
Bangladesh
.
(2) Where such security is not furnished within such
time as the Court orders, the Court shall reject the appeal.
Power to
dismiss appeal
without sending
notice to Lower
Court
11. (1) The appellate Court, after sending for the record
if it thinks fit so to do, and after fixing a day for hearing the
appellant or his pleader and hearing him accordingly if he
appears on that day, may dismiss the appeal without sending
notice to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred
and without serving notice on the respondent or his pleader.
(2) If on the day fixed or any other day to which the
hearing may be adjourned the appellant does not appear when
the appeal is called on for hearing, the Court may make an
order that the appeal be dismissed.
(3) The dismissal of an appeal under this rule shall be
notified to the Court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred.
Day for hearing
appeal
12. (1) Unless the Appellate Court dismisses the appeal
under rule 11, it shall fix a day for hearing the appeal.
(2) Such day shall be fixed with reference to the current
business of the Court, the place of residence of the respondent,
and the time necessary for the service of the notice of appeal,
so as to allow the respondent sufficient time to appear and
answer the appeal on such day.
Adjournment
in appeal
1
[12A. (1) The Appellate Court shall not grant more than
three adjournments for hearing of an appeal at the instance of
either party to the appeal, and any adjournment granted to a
party beyond the aforesaid limit shall make such party liable
to pay such cost which shall not be less than two hundred taka
and more than one thousand taka to the other party as the
Court may deem appropriate and determine, non-compliance
with which, by the appellant shall render the appeal liable to
be dismissed and, by the respondent shall render the appeal
liable to be disposed of ex parte.
(2) An appeal dismissed or disposed of ex parte under
sub-rule (1) shall not be revived for hearing unless the party,
for whose non-compliance the appeal was dismissed or
.

1 Rule 12A was inserted by section 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006).
disposed of ex parte, makes, within thirty days of such
dismissal or ex parte disposal, an application to the court for
such revival; and upon such application being made, the Court
shall award such cost as shall not be less than two hundred taka
and more than one thousand taka as it may deem appropriate
and determine, and the cost being deposited, the appeal shall be
revived for hearing without any further proceeding; and the cost
deposited in the Court shall be paid by it to the other party:
Provided that no appeal shall be revived more than once at
the instance of the same party under this rule.
(3) The Appellate Court shall not, of its own, order any
adjournment at the stage of hearing of appeal without recording
reasons therefor.]
13. (1) Where the appeal is not dismissed under rule 11,
the Appellate Court shall send notice of the appeal to the Court
from whose decree the appeal is preferred.
Appellate Court
to give notice to
Court whose
decree appealed
from
(2) Where the appeal is from the decree of a Court, the
records of which are not deposited in the Appellate Court, the
Court receiving such notice shall send with all practicable
dispatch all material papers in the suit, or such papers as may be
specially called for by the Appellate Court.
Transmission of
papers to
Appellate Court
(3) Either party may apply in writing to the Court from
whose decree the appeal is preferred, specifying any of the
papers in such Court of which he requires copies to be made;
and copies of such papers shall be made at the expense of, and
given to, the applicant.
Copies of
exhibits in Court
whose decree
Appealed from
14.1
[(1) Notice of the day fixed under rule 12 shall be
affixed in the Appellate Court-house, and a like notice shall be
sent by the Appellate Court to the Court from whose decree the
appeal is preferred and shall be served on the respondent in the
manner provided for the service on a defendant of a summons to
appear and answer. Simultaneously with the issue of such
summons a copy of the notice shall be served by registered post
with acknowledgment due addressed to the respondent and all
Publication and
service of notice
of day for
hearing appeal
.

1
Sub-rule (1) was substituted, for sub-rule (1) by section 5 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
the provisions applicable to summons upon a defendant in a
suit, and to proceedings with reference to the service thereof,
shall apply to the service of such notice.]
Appellate Court
may itself cause
notice to be
served
(2) Instead of sending the notice to the Court from whose
decree the appeal is preferred, the Appellate Court may itself
cause the notice to be served on the respondent or his pleader
under the provisions above referred to.
Contents of
notice
15. The notice to the respondent shall declare that, if he
does not appear in the Appellate Court on the day so fixed, the
appeal will be heard ex parte.
Prosecution of
an appeal
1
[15A. Where, after admission of an appeal in the High
Court Division, the rules of the High Court Division, require the
appellant to take any steps in the prosecution of the appeal, and
the appellant fails to take such steps within the time allowed or
extended under the said rules, the Court may direct the appeal
to be dismissed for want of prosecution or may pass such other
order as it thinks fit.]
Procedure on Hearing
Right to begin 16. (1) On the day fixed, or on any other day to which the
hearing may be adjourned, the appellant shall be heard in
support of the appeal.
(2) The Court shall then, if it does not dismiss the appeal
at once, hear the respondent against the appeal, and in such case
the appellant shall be entitled to reply.
Dismissal of
appeal for
appellant's
default
17. (1) Where on the day fixed, or on any other day to
which the hearing may be adjourned, the appellant does not
appear when the appeal is called on for hearing, the Court may
make an order that the appeal be dismissed.
Hearing appeal
ex parte
(2) Where the appellant appears and the respondent does
not appear, the appeal shall be heard ex parte.
Dismissal of
appeal where
notice not served
in consequence
of appellant's
failure to deposit
costs
18. Where on the day fixed, or on any other day to which
the hearing maybe adjourned, it is found that the notice to the
respondent had not been served in consequence of the failure of
the appellant to deposit, within the period fixed, the sum
required to defray the cost of serving the notice, the Court may
make an order that the appeal be dismissed:
.

1 Rule 15A was added by the High Court of Judicature at Dacca, Notification No. 4497
G. dated 6-6-1952, published in the Dacca Gazette, 1952, Part I.
Provided that no such order shall be made although the
notice has not been served upon the respondent, if on any such
day the respondent appears when the appeal is called on for
hearing.
19. (1) Where an appeal is dismissed under rule 11, subrule (2), or rule 15A or rule 17 or rule 18, the appellant may
apply to the Appellant Court for the re-admission of the appeal;
and, where it is proved that he was prevented by any sufficient
cause from appearing when the appeal was called on for hearing
or from depositing the sum so required, the Court shall re-admit
the appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.
Re-admission of
appeal dismissed
for default
(2) Provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908
shall apply to applications under sub-rule (1).
1
[19A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 19
or any other law, the Court may, in order to avoid delay and
expedite disposal, directly re-admit without requiring the
appellant to adduce evidence to satisfy it about sufficient causes
as required under rule 19:
Direct readmission of
appeal
Provided that the appeal under this rule shall not be readmitted unless an application, supported by affidavit, praying
for such re-admission is made to the Court within thirty days of
the date on which the appeal is dismissed for default:
Provided further that no appeal shall be re-admitted more
than once under this rule.
(2) As soon as an order under sub-rule (1) is made to readmit an appeal, the Court shall cause notice thereof to be
served at the cost of the appellant upon the respondent who
appeared in the appeal.]
20. Where it appears to the Court at the hearing that any
person who was a party to the suit in the Court from whose
decree the appeal is preferred, but who has not been made a
party to the appeal, is interested in the result of the appeal the
Court may adjourn the hearing to a future day to be fixed by the
Court and direct that such person be made a respondent.
Power to adjourn
hearing and
direct persons
appearing
interested to be
made
respondents
.

1 Rule 19A was inserted by section 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006).
Re-hearing on
application of
respondent
against whom ex
parte decree
made
21. Where an appeal is heard ex parte and judgment is
pronounced against the respondent, he may apply to the Appellate
Court to re-hear the appeal; and, if he satisfies the Court that the notice
was not duly served or that he was prevented by sufficient cause from
appearing when the appeal was called on for hearing, the Court shall
re-hear the appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit
to impose upon him1
[:
 Provided that no Appeal shall be re-heard more than once under
this rule.]
Direct re-hearing
of appeal
2
[21A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 21 or any
other law, the Court may, in order to avoid delay and expedite
disposal, directly re-hear an appeal which is heard ex parte, without
requiring the respondent to adduce evidence to satisfy it about
sufficient causes as required under rule 21, but requiring him to pay
such cost not exceeding three thousand taka as it may deem
appropriate and determine:
Provided that an appeal under this rule shall not be re-heard
unless an application, supported by affidavit, praying for such rehearing is made to the Court within thirty days of the date on which the
ex parte decree is passed against the respondent:
Provided further that no appeal shall be re-heard more than once
under this rule.
(2) As soon as an order under sub-rule (1) is made to re-hear an
appeal, the Court shall cause notice thereof to be served at the cost of
the respondent upon the appellant.]
Upon hearing,
respondent may
object to decree
as if he had
preferred
separate appeal
22. (1) Any respondent, though he may not have appealed from
any part of the decree, may not only support the decree on any of the
grounds decided against him in the Court below, but take any crossobjection to the decree which he could have taken by way of appeal,
provided he has filed such objection in the Appellate Court within one
month from the date of service on him or his pleader of notice of the
day fixed for hearing the appeal, or within such further time as the
Appellate Court may see fit to allow.
.

1
 The colon “:” was substituted for the full stop “.” and thereafter proviso was inserted
by section 15(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025
(Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
2 Rule 21A was inserted by section 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2006 (Act No. VIII of 2006).
(2) Such cross-objection shall be in the form of a
memorandum, and the provisions of rule 1, so far as they relate
to the form and contents of the memorandum of appeal, shall
apply thereto.
Form of
objection and
provisions
applicable
thereto
(3) Unless the respondent files with the objection a
written acknowledgment from the party who may be affected by
such objection or his pleader of having received a copy thereof,
the Appellate Court shall cause a copy to be served, as soon as
may be after the filing of the objections, on such party or his
pleader at the expense of the respondent.
 (4) Where, in any case in which any respondent has under
this rule filed a memorandum of objection, the original appeal is
withdrawn or is dismissed for default, the objection so filed
may nevertheless be heard and determined after such notice of
the other parties as the Court thinks fit.
(5) The provisions relating to pauper appeals shall, so far
as they can be made applicable, apply to an objection under this
rule.
23. Where the Court from whose decree an appeal is
preferred has disposed of the suit upon a preliminary point and
the decree is reversed in appeal, the Appellate Court may, if it
thinks fit, by order remand the case, and may further direct what
issue or issues shall be tried in the case so remanded, and shall
send a copy of its judgment and order to the Court from whose
decree the appeal is preferred, with directions to re-admit the
suit under its original number in the register of civil suits, and
proceed to determine the suit; and the evidence (if any)
recorded during the original trial shall, subject to all just
exceptions, be evidence during the trial after remand.
Remand of
case by
Appellate
Court
 24. Where the evidence upon the record is sufficient to
enable the Appellate Court to pronounce judgment, the
Appellate Court may, after resettling the issues, if necessary,
finally determine the suit, notwithstanding that the judgment of
the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has
proceeded wholly upon some ground other than that on which
the Appellate Court proceeds.
Where
evidence on
record
sufficient,
Appellate
Court 1
[shall]
determine case
finally .

1
 The word “shall” was substituted for the word “may” by section 15(b) of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
Where
Appellate Court
may frame
issues and refer
them for trial to
Court whose
decree
appealed from
25. Where the Court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred has omitted to frame or try any issue, or to determine
any question of fact, which appears to the Appellate Court
essential to the right decision of the suit upon the merits, the
Appellate Court may, if necessary, frame issues, and refer the
same for trial to the Court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred, and in such case shall direct such Court to take the
additional evidence required;
and such Court shall proceed to try such issues, and shall
return the evidence to the Appellate Court together with its
findings thereon and the reasons therefor.
Findings and
evidence to be
put on record.
Objections to
finding
26. (1) Such evidence and findings shall form part of the
record in the suit; and either party may, within a time to be
fixed by the Appellate Court, present a memorandum of
objections to any findings.
Determination
of appeal
(2) After the expiration of the period so fixed for
presenting such memorandum the Appellate Court shall
proceed to determine the appeal.
Production of
additional
evidence in
Appellate
Court
27. (1) The parties to an appeal shall not be entitled to
produce additional evidence, whether oral or documentary, in
the Appellate Court. But if
(a) the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has
refused to admit evidence which ought to have been
admitted, or
(b) the Appellate Court requires any document to be
produced or any witness to be examined to enable it to
pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause,
the Appellate Court may allow such evidence or document to
be produced, or witness to be examined.
(2) Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be
produced by an Appellate Court, the Court shall record the
reason for its admission.
Mode of
taking
additional
evidence
28. Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be
produced, the Appellate Court may either take such evidence,
or direct the Court from whose decrees the appeal is preferred,
or any other subordinate Court, to take such evidence and to
send it when taken to the Appellate Court.
Points to be
defined and
recorded
29. Where additional evidence is directed or allowed to be
taken, the Appellate Court shall specify the points to which the
evidence is to be confined, and record on its proceedings the
points so specified.
.
Judgment in Appeal
30. 1
[(1)] The Appellate Court, after hearing the parties or
their pleaders and referring to any part of the proceedings,
whether on appeal or in the Court from whose decree the appeal
is preferred, to which reference may be considered necessary,
shall pronounce judgment in open Court, either at once or on
some future day of which notice shall be given to the parties or
their pleaders.

2
[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1),
if neither party nor his pleader appears when the appeal is
called on for hearing, the Appellate Court may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, if considers the materials on record are
sufficient to dispose of the appeal on merits, pronounce
judgment in open Court immediately or on a date to be fixed by
it.]
Judgment
when and
where
pronounce
d
31. The judgment of the Appellate Court shall be in
writing and shall state
Contents,
date and
signature
of
Judgment
(a) the points for determination;
(b) the decision thereon;
(c) the reasons for the decision; and,
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or
varied, the relief to which the appellant is entitled;
and shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed and dated
by the Judge or by the Judges concurring therein.

1
Sub-rule (1) was numbered by section 15(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
2
 Sub-rule (2) was added by section 15(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 2025).
32. The judgment may be for confirming, varying or
reversing the decree from which the appeal is preferred, or, if
the parties to the appeal agree as to the form which the decree in
appeal shall take, or as to the order to be made in appeal, the
Appellate Court may pass a decree or make an order
accordingly.
What
judgment
may direct
33. The Appellate Court shall have power to pass any
decree and make any order which ought to have been passed or
made and to pass or make such further or other decree or order
as the case may require, and this power may be exercised by the
Court notwithstanding that the appeal is as to part only of the
decree and may be exercised in favour of all or any of the
respondents or parties, although such respondents or parties
may not have filed any appeal or objection:
Power of
Court of
Appeal
Provided that the Appellate Court shall not make any
order under section 65A, in pursuance of any objection on
which the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has
omitted or refused to make such order.
.
Illustration
A claims a sum of money as due to him from X or Y, and in a
suit against both obtains a decree against X. X appeals and A and Y are
respondents. The Appellate Court decides in favour of X. It has power
to pass a decree against Y.
Dissent to be
recorded
34. Where the appeal is heard by more Judges than one,
any Judge dissenting from the judgment of the Court shall state
in writing the decision or order which he thinks should be
passed on the appeal, and he may state his reasons for the same.
Decree in Appeal
Date and
contents of
decree
35. (1) The decree of the Appellate Court shall bear date
the day on which the judgment was pronounced.
(2) The decree shall contain the number of the appeal, the
names and descriptions of the appellant and respondent, and a
clear specification of the relief granted or other adjudication
made.
(3) The decree shall also state the amount of costs
incurred in the appeal, and by whom, or out of what property,
and in what proportions such costs and the costs in the suit are
to be paid.
(4) The decree shall be signed and dated by the Judge or
Judges who passed it :
Judge
dissenting
from
judgment
need not sign
decree
Provided that where there are more Judges than one and
there is a difference of opinion among them, it shall not be
necessary for any Judge dissenting from the judgment of the
Court to sign the decree.
Copies of
judgment and
decree to be
furnished to
parties
36. Certified copies of the judgment, and decree in appeal
shall be furnished to the parties on application to the Appellate
Court and at their expense.
Certified copy
of decree to
be sent to
Court whose
decree
appealed from
37. A copy of the judgment and of the decree, certified by
the Appellate Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf,
shall be sent to the Court which passed the decree appealed
from and shall be filed with the original proceedings in the suit,
and an entry of the judgment of the Appellate Court shall be
made in the register of civils suits.
.
ORDER XLII
APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES
1. The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be, to
appeals from appellate decrees.
Procedure
ORDER XLIII
APPEALS FROM ORDERS
1. An appeal shall lie from the following orders under the
provisions of section 104, namely:
Appeals from
orders
(a) an order under rule 10 of Order VII returning a plaint to
be presented to the proper Court;
(b) an order under rule 10 of Order VIII pronouncing
judgment against a party;
(c) an order under rule 9 of Order IX rejecting an
application (in a case open to appeal) for an order to set
aside the dismissal of a suit;
(d) an order under rule 13 of Order IX rejecting an
application (in a case open to appeal) for an order to set
aside a decree passed ex parte;
(e) an order under rule 4 of Order X pronouncing judgment
against a party;
(f) an order under rule 21 of Order XI;
(g) an order under rule 10 of Order XVI for the attachment
of property;
(h) an order under rule 20 of Order XVI pronouncing
judgment against a party;
(i) an order under rule 34 of Order XXI on an objection to
the draft of a document or of an endorsement;
1
[(ii) an order under rule 60 of Order XXI releasing a
property from attachment;
(iii) an order under rule 61 of Order XXI disallowing a claim
to property attached;]
(j) an order under rule 72 or rule 92 of Order XXI setting
aside or refusing to set aside a sale;
(k) an order under rule 9 of Order XXII refusing to set aside
the abatement or dismissal of a suit;
(l) an order under rule 10 of Order XXII giving or refusing
to give leave;
(m) an order under rule 3 of Order XXIII recording or
refusing to record an agreement, compromise or
satisfaction;
.

1 Clauses (ii) and (iii) were inserted by section 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Ordinance No. XLVIII of 1983).
(n) an order under rule 2 of Order XXV rejecting an
application (in a case open to appeal) for an order to
set aside the dismissal of a suit;
(o) an order under rule 2, rule 4 or rule 7 of Order
XXXIV refusing to extend the time for the payment of
mortgage-money;
(p) orders in interpleader-suits under rule 3, rule 4 or rule
6 of Order XXXV;
(q) an order under rule 2, rule 3 or rule 6 of Order
XXXVIII;
(r) an order under rule 1, rule 2, rule 4 or rule 10 of
Order XXXIX;
(s) an order under rule 1 or rule 4 of Order XL;
(t) an order of refusal under rule 19 of Order XLI to readmit, or under rule 21 of Order XLI to re-hear, an
appeal;
(u) an order under rule 23 of Order XLI remanding a
case, where an appeal would lie from the decree of the
Appellate Court;
(v) an order made by any Court other than the High Court
Division refusing the grant of a certificate under rule 6
of Order XLV;
(w) an order under rule 4 of Order XLVII granting an
application for review.
Procedure 2. The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be,
to appeals from orders.
ORDER XLIV
PAUPER APPEALS
Who may
appeal as
pauper
1. Any person entitled to prefer an appeal, who is unable
to pay the fee required for the memorandum of appeal, may
present an application accompanied by a memorandum of
appeal, and may be allowed to appeal as a pauper, subject, in
all matters, including the presentation of such application, to
the provisions relating to suits by paupers, in so far as those
provisions are applicable:
Procedure on
application
for admission
of appeal
Provided that the Court shall reject the application
unless, upon a perusal thereof and of the judgment and decree
appealed from, it sees reason to think that the decree is
contrary to law or to some usage having the force of law, or is
otherwise erroneous or unjust.
.
2. The inquiry into the pauperism of the applicant may be
made either by the Appellate Court or under the order of the
Appellate Court by the Court from whose decision the appeal is
preferred:
Inquiry into
pauperism
Provided that, if the applicant was allowed to sue or
appeal as a pauper in the Court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred, no further inquiry in respect of his pauperism shall be
necessary, unless the Appellate Court sees cause to direct such
inquiry.
ORDER XLV
APPEALS TO THE 1
[APPELLATE DIVISION]
1. In this Order, unless there is something repugnant in the
subject or context, the expression "decree" shall include a final
order.
"Decree"
defined
2. Whoever desires to appeal to the 1
[Appellate Division]
shall apply by petition to the Court whose decree is complained
of.
Application to
Court whose
decree
complained of
3. (1) Every petition shall state the grounds of appeal and
pay for a certificate either that, as regards amount or value and
nature, the case fulfils the requirements of section 110, or that it
is otherwise a fit one for appeal to the 1
[Appellate Division].
Certificate as to
value or fitness
(2) Upon receipt of such petition, the Court shall direct
notice to be served on the opposite party to show cause why the
said certificate should not be granted.
4. For the purposes of pecuniary valuation, suits involving
substantially the same questions for determination and decided
by the same judgment may be consolidate but suits decided by
separate judgments shall not be consolidate notwithstanding
that they involve substantially the same questions for
determination.
Consolidation of
suits
.

1 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act,
1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
Remission of
dispute to
Court to first
instance
5. In the event of any dispute arising between the parties
as to the amount or value of the subject-matter of the suit in
the Court of first instance, or as to the amount or value of the
subject-matter in dispute on appeal to the 1
[Appellate
Division], the Court to which a petition for a certificate is
made under rule 2 may, if it thinks fit, refer such dispute for
report to the Court of first instance, which last-mentioned
Court shall proceed to determine such amount or value and
shall return its report together with the evidence to the Court
by which the reference was made.
Effect of
refusal of
certificate
6. Where such certificate is refused, the petition shall be
dismissed.
Security and
deposit
required on
grant of
certificate
7. Where the certificate is granted, the applicant shall,
within six weeks from the date of the grant of the certificate,
or such further period as the Court may upon cause shown
allow except when the Government is the applicant,
(a) furnish security in case or in Government securities
for the costs of the respondent except when the
Government is the applicant, and
(b) deposit the amount required to defray the expense of
translating, transcribing, indexing, printing and
transmitting to the 1
[Appellate Division] a correct
copy of the whole record of the suit, except
(1) formal documents directed to be excluded by
any Rule of the 1
[Appellate Division] in force
for the time being;
(2) papers which the parties agree to exclude;
(3) accounts, or portions of accounts, which the
officer empowered by the Court for that purpose
considers unnecessary, and which the parties
have not specifically asked to be included; and
(4) such other documents as the High Court
Division may direct to be excluded:
Provided that the Court at the time of granting the
.

1 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act,
1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
certificate may, after hearing any opposite party who appears,
order on the ground of special hardship that some other form of
security may be furnished:
Provided, further, that no adjournment shall be granted to
an opposite party to context the nature of such security.
8. Where such security has been furnished and deposit
made to the satisfaction of the Court, the Court shall
(a) declare the appeal admitted,
Admission of
appeal and
procedure
thereon
(b) give notice thereof to the respondent,
(c) transmit to the 1
[Appellate Division] under the seal of
the Court a correct copy of the said record, except as
aforesaid, and
(d) give to either one or more authenticated copies of any of
the papers in the suit on his applying therefor and
paying the reasonable expenses incurred in preparing
them.
9. At any time before the admission of the appeal the
Court may, upon cause shown, revoke the acceptance of any
such security, and make further directions thereon.
Revocation of
acceptance of
security
2
[9A. Nothing in these rules requiring any notice to be
served on or given to an opposite party or respondent shall be
deemed to require any notice to be served on or given to the
legal representative of any deceased opposite party or deceased
respondent in a case, where such opposite party or respondent
did not appear either at the hearing in the Court whose decree is
complained of or at any proceedings subsequent to the decree of
that Court:
Power to
dispense with
notices in case
of deceased
parties
Provided that notices under sub-rule (2) of rule 3 and
under rule 8 shall be given by affixing the same in some
conspicuous place in the Court-house of the Judge of the
District in which the suit was originally brought, and by
publication in such newspapers as the Court may direct.]
.

1 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act,
1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
2 Rule 9A was inserted by section 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
1920 (Act No. XXVI of 1920).
Power to
order further
security or
payment
10. Where at any time after the admission of an appeal
but before the transmission of the copy of the record, except
as aforesaid, to the 1
[Appellate Division], such security
appears inadequate,
or further payment is required for the purpose of
translating, transcribing, printing, indexing or transmitting the
copy of the record, except as aforesaid,
the Court may order the appellant to furnish, within a
time to be fixed by the court, other and sufficient security, or
to make, within like time, the required payment.
Effect of
failure to
comply with
order
11. Where the appellant fails to comply with such order,
the proceedings shall be stayed,
and the appeal shall not proceed without an order in this
behalf of the 1
[Appellate Division],
and in the meantime execution of the decree appealed
from shall not be stayed.
Refund of
balance
deposit
12. When the copy of the record, except as aforesaid, has
been transmitted to the 1
[Appellate Division], the appellant
may obtain a refund of the balance (if any) of the amount
which he has deposited under rule 7.
Powers of
Court pending
appeal
13. (1) Notwithstanding the grant of a certificate for the
admission of any appeal, the decree appealed from shall be
unconditionally executed, unless the Court otherwise directs.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, on special cause
shown by any party interested in the suit, or otherwise
appearing to the Court,-
(a) impound any moveable property in dispute or any part
thereof, or
(b) allow the decree appealed from to be executed, taking
such security from the respondent as the Court thinks
fit for the due performance of any order which the
1
[Appellate Division] may make on the appeal, or
.

1 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act,
1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
(c) stay the execution of the decree appealed from, taking
such security from the appellant as the Court thinks fit
for the due performance of the decree appealed from, or
of any order which 1
[Appellate Division] may make on
the appeal, or
(d) place any party seeking the assistance of the Court
under such conditions or give such other direction
respecting the subject-matter of the appeal, as it thinks
fit, by the appointment of a receiver or otherwise.
14. (1) Where at any time during the pendency of the
appeal the security furnished by either party appears inadequate,
the Court may, on the application of the other party, require
further security.
Increase of
security found
inadequate
(2) In default of such further security being furnished as
required by the Court,
(a) if the original security was furnished by the appellant,
the Court may, on the application of the respondent,
excuse the decree appealed from as if the appellant had
furnished no such security;
(b) if the original security was furnished by the respondent,
the Court shall, so far as may be practicable, stay the
further execution of the decree, and restore the parties to
the position in which they respectively were when the
security which appears inadequate was furnished, or
give such direction respecting the subject-matter of
appeal as it thinks fit.
15. (1) Whoever desires to obtain execution of any order
of the 1
[Appellate Division] shall apply by petition,
accompanied by a certified copy of the decree passed or order
made in appeal and sought to be executed, to the Court from
which the appeal to the 1
[Appellate Division] was preferred.
Procedure to
enforce orders
of the
Appellate
Division
(2) Such Court shall transmit the order of the 1
[Appellate
Division] to the Court which passed the first decree appealed
from, or to such other Court as the 1
[Appellate Division] by
such order may direct, and shall (upon the application of either
party) give such directions as may be required for the execution
.

1 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act,
1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
of the same; and the Court to which the said order is so
transmitted shall execute it accordingly, in the manner and
according to the provisions applicable to the execution of its
original decrees.
(3) When any monies expressed to be payable in British
Currency are payable in Bangladesh under such order, the
amount so payable shall be estimated according to the rate of
exchange for the time being fixed at the date of the making of
the order for the adjustment of financial transactions between
the Government and His Majesty's Government in the United
Kingdom.
(4) Unless the 1
[Appellate Division] is pleased otherwise
to direct, no order of the 1
[Appellate Division] shall be
inoperative on the ground that no notice has been served on or
given to the legal representative of any deceased opposite
party or deceased respondent in a case, where such opposite
party or respondent did not appear either at the hearing in the
Court whose decree was complained of or at any proceedings
subsequent to the decree of that Court, but such order shall
have the same force and effect as if it had been made before
the death took place.
Appeal from
order relating
to execution
16. The orders made by the Court which executes the
order of the 1
[Appellate Division], relating to such execution,
shall be appealable in the same manner and subject to the
same rules as the orders of such Court relating to the
execution of its own decrees.
17. [Omitted by the Federal Court Act, 1941 (Act No.
XXI of 1941), section 2.]
ORDER XLVI
REFERENCE
Reference of
question to
High Court
Division
1. Where, before or on the hearing of a suit or an appeal
in which the decree is not subject to appeal, or where, in the
execution of any such decree, any question of law or usage
.

1 The words "Appellate Division" were substituted, for the words "Supreme Court" by
section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act,
1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
having the force of law arises, on which the Court trying the
suit or appeal, or executing the decree, entertains reasonable
doubt, the Court may, either of its own motion or on the
application of any of the parties, draw up a statement of the
facts of the case and the point on which doubt is entertained,
and refer such statement with its own opinion on the point for
the decision of the High Court Division.
2. The Court may either stay the proceedings or proceed
in the case notwithstanding such reference, and may pass a
decree or make an order contingent upon the decision of the
High Court Division on the point referred;
Court may pass
decree
contingent upon
decision of High
Court Division
but no decree or order shall be executed in any case in
which such reference is made until the receipt of a copy of the
judgment of the High Court Division upon the reference.
3. The High Court Division, after hearing the parties if
they appear and desire to be heard, shall decide the point so
referred, and shall transmit a copy of its judgment, under the
signature of the Registrar, to the Court by which the reference
was made; and such Court shall, on the receipt thereof, proceed
to dispose of the case in conformity with the decision of the
High Court Division.
Judgment of
High Court
Division to be
transmitted, and
case disposed of
accordingly
4. The costs (if any) consequent on a reference for the
decision of the High Court Division shall be costs in the case.
Cost of
reference to
High Court
Division
5. Where a case is referred to High Court Division under
rule 1, the High Court Division may return the case for
amendment, and may alter, cancel or set aside any decree or
order which the Court making the reference has passed or made
in the case out of which the reference arose, and make such
order as it thinks fit.
Power to alter,
etc., decree of
Court making
reference
6. (1) Where at any time before judgment a Court in
which a suit has been instituted doubts whether the suit is
cognizable by a Court of Small Causes or is not so cognizable,
it may submit the record to the High Court Division with a
statement of its reasons for the doubt as to the nature of the suit.
Power to refer to
High Court
division
questions as to
jurisdiction in
small causes
(2) On receiving the record and statement, the High Court
Division may order the Court either to proceed with the suit or to
return the plaint for presentation to such other Court as it may in
its order declare to be competent to take cognizance of the suit.
.
Power to
District Court
to submit for
revision
proceedings
had under
mistake as to
jurisdiction in
small causes
7. (1) Where it appears to a District Court that a Court
subordinate thereto has, by reason of erroneously holding a suit
to be cognizable by a Court of Small Causes or not to be so
cognizable, failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law,
or exercised a jurisdiction not so vested, the District Court may,
and if required by a party shall, submit the record to the High
Court Division with a statement of its reasons for considering
the opinion of the subordinate Court with respect to the nature
of the suit to be erroneous.
(2) On receiving the record and statement the High Court
Division may make such order in the case as it thinks fit.
(3) With respect to any proceedings subsequent to decree
in any case submitted to the High Court Division under this
rule, the High Court Division may make such order as in the
circumstance appears to it to be just and proper.
(4) A Court subordinate to a District Court shall comply
with any requisition which the District Court may make for any
record or information for the purposes of this rule.
ORDER XLVII
REVIEW
Application
for review of
judgment
1. (1) Any person considering himself aggrieved
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed,
but from which no appeal has been preferred,
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed,
or
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small
Causes,
and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or
evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not
within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the
time when the decree was passed or order made, or on account
of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or
for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the
decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a
review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or
made the order.
.
(2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order
may apply for a review of judgment notwithstanding the
pendency of an appeal by same other party except where the
ground of such appeal is common to the applicant and the
appellant, or when, being respondent, he can present to the
Appellate Court the case on which he applies for the review.
2. An application for review of a decree or order of a
Court, not being the High Court Division, upon some ground
other than the discovery of such new and important matter or
evidence as is referred to in rule 1 or the existence of a clerical
or arithmetical mistake or error apparent on the face of the
decree, shall be made only to the Judge who passed the decree
or made the order sought to be reviewed; but any such
application may, if the Judge who passed the decree or made the
order has ordered notice to issue under rule 4, sub-rule (2),
proviso (a), be disposed of by his successor.
To whom
applications
for review may
be made
3. The provisions as to the form of preferring appeals shall
apply, mutatis mutandis, to applications for review.
Form of
applications
for review
4. (1) Where it appears to the Court that there is not
sufficient ground for a review, it shall reject the application.
Application
where rejected
(2) Where the Court is of opinion that the application for
review should be granted, it shall grant the same:
Application
where granted
Provided that
(a) no such application shall be granted without previous
notice to the opposite party, to enable him to appear and
be heard in support of the decree or order, a review of
which is applied for: and
(b) no such application shall be granted on the ground of
discovery of new matter or evidence which the applicant
alleges was not within his knowledge, or could not be
adduced by him when the decree or order was passed or
made, without strict proof of such allegation.
5. Where the Judge or Judges, or any one of the Judges,
who passed the decree or made the order, a review of which is
applied for, continues or continue attached to the Court at the
time when the application for a review is presented, and is not
or are not precluded by absence or other cause for a period of
Application
for review in
Court
consisting of
two or more
Judges
.
six months next after the application from considering the
decree or order to which the application refers, such Judge or
Judges or any of them shall hear the application, and no other
Judge or Judges of the Court shall hear the same.
Application
where
rejected
6. (1) Where the application for a review is heard by
more than one Judge and the Court is equally divided, the
application shall be rejected.
(2) Where there is a majority, the decision shall be
according to the opinion of the majority.
Order of
rejection not
appealable.
Objection to
order granting
application
7. (1) An order of the Court rejecting the applications
shall not be appealable; but an order granting an application
may be objected to on the ground that the application was
(a) in contravention of the provisions of rule 2,
(b) in contravention of the provisions of rule 4, or
(c) after the expiration of the period of limitation
prescribed therefor and without sufficient cause.
Such objection may be taken at once by an appeal from
the order granting the application or in any appeal from the
final decree or order passed or made in the suit.
(2) Where the application has been rejected in
consequence of the failure of the applicant to appear, he may
apply for an order to have the rejected application restored to
the file, and, where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court
that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing
when such application was called on for hearing, the Court
shall order it to be restored to the file upon such terms as to
costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for
hearing the same.
(3) No order shall be made under sub-rule (2) unless
notice of the application has been served on the opposite
party.
Registry of
application
granted, and
order for rehearing
8. When an application for review is granted, a note
thereof shall be made in the register and the Court may at once
re-hear the case or make such order in regard to the re-hearing
as it thinks fit.
Bar of certain
applications
9. No application to review an order made on an
application for a review or a decree or order passed or made
on a review shall be entertained.
.
ORDER XLVIII
MISCELLANEOUS
1. (1) Every process issued under this Code shall be
served at the expense of the party on whose behalf it is issued,
unless the Court otherwise directs.
Process to be
served at
expense of party
issuing
(2) The court-fee chargeable for such service shall be paid
within a time to be fixed before the process is issued.
Costs of service
2. All orders, notices and other documents required by this
Code to be given to or served on any person shall be served in
the manner provided for the service of summons.
Orders and
notices how
served
3. The forms given in the appendices, with such variation
as the circumstances of each case may require, shall be used for
the purposes therein mentioned.
Use of forms in
appendices
ORDER XLIX
HIGH COURT DIVISION
1. Notice to produce documents, summonses to witnesses,
and every other judicial process, issued in the exercise of the
original civil jurisdiction of the High Court Division, and of its
matrimonial, testamentary and intestate jurisdictions, except
summonses to defendants, writs of execution and notices to
respondents may be served by the 1
[advocates] in the suits, or
by persons employed by them, or by such other persons as the
High Court Division, by any rule or order, directs.
Who may serve
processes of
High Court
Division
2. Nothing in this schedule shall be deemed to limit or
otherwise affect any rules in force at the commencement of this
Code for the taking of evidence or the recording of judgments
and orders by the High Court Division.
Saving in
respect of High
Court Division
.

1 The word "advocates" was substituted, for the word "attorneys" by section 3 and 2nd
Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII
of 1973).
Application
of rules
3. The following rules shall not apply to 1
[the High Court
Division] in the exercise of its ordinary or extraordinary
original civil jurisdiction, namely:
(1) rule 10 and rule 11, clauses (d) and (c), of Order
VII;
(2) rule 3 of Order X;
(3) rule 2 of Order XVI;
(4) rules 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16 (so far as
relates to the manner of taking evidence) of Order
XVIII;
(5) rules 1 to 8 of Order XX; and
(6) rule 7 of Order XXXIII (so far as relates to the
making of a memorandum);
and rule 35 of Order XLI shall not apply to the High Court
Division in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction.
ORDER L
2
[* * *] SMALL CAUSE COURTS
Small Cause
Courts
1. The provisions hereinafter specified shall not extend to
Courts constituted under the 3
[* * *] Small Cause Courts Act,
1887, or to courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small
Causes under the said Act, that is to say
(a) so much of this schedule as relates to
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of
Small Causes or the execution of decrees in such
suits;
.

1 The words "the High Court Division" were substituted, for the words "any such High
Court" by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh Laws (Revision and
Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
2 The word "PROVINCIAL" was omitted by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the
Bangladesh Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
3 The word "Provincial" was omitted, by section 3 and 2nd Schedule of the Bangladesh
Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1973 (Act No. VIII of 1973).
(ii) the execution of decrees against immoveable
property or the interest of a partner in partnership
property;
(iii) the settlement of issues; and
(b) the following rules and orders,
Order II, rule 1 (frame of suit);
Order X, rule 3 (record of examination of parties);
Order XV, except so much of rule 4 as provides for
the pronouncement at once of judgment;
Order XVIII, rules 5 to 12 (evidence);
Order XLI to XLV (appeals);
Order XLVII, rules 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 (review);
Order LI.
ORDER LI. [Omitted by the Adaptation of Central Acts and
Ordinances Order, 1949.]
